
===== PAGE 1 =====
Self-learning Machines based on Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation
Victor Lopez-Pastor1 and Florian Marquardt1,2
1Max Planck Institute for the Science of Light, Erlangen, Germany
2Physics Department, Friedrich-Alexander-Universität Erlangen-Nürnberg, Erlangen, Germany
(Dated: February 8, 2023)
A physical self-learning machine can be deﬁned as a nonlinear dynamical system that can be
trained on data (similar to artiﬁcial neural networks), but where the update of the internal degrees
of freedom that serve as learnable parameters happens autonomously. In this way, neither external
processing and feedback nor knowledge of (and control of) these internal degrees of freedom is
required. We introduce a general scheme for self-learning in any time-reversible Hamiltonian system.
It relies on implementing a time-reversal operation and injecting a small error signal on top of the
echo dynamics. We show how the physical dynamics itself will then lead to the required gradient
update of learnable parameters, independent of the details of the Hamiltonian. We illustrate the
training of such a self-learning machine numerically for the case of coupled nonlinear wave ﬁelds
and other examples.
I. INTRODUCTION
In the last decade, the ﬁeld of Machine Learning (ML)
has experienced an explosive growth, ﬁnding use in an
ever-increasing number of applications in our everyday
lives, from automatic driving to face recognition. To
a large degree, this astonishing progress in ML can be
attributed to the developments in Artiﬁcial Neural Net-
works (ANN). Training deep ANN’s has only recently
become possible in practice [1], thanks both to the avail-
ability of large data sets and to the continued improve-
ment in digital electronic hardware and the advent of
fast Graphical Processing Units (GPU) and other spe-
cialized hardware. However, while the demand for faster
and more eﬃcient information processing will only grow
in order to address the needs of increasingly larger and
complex ANN’s, the exponential growth in the power of
electronic devices that we enjoyed in the last half century
appears to be coming to a halt.
What is more, the von Neumann architecture that is
currently employed by electronic devices is known to be
highly ineﬃcient for most ML applications. In a von
Neumann computer, the memory and processing units
are separated, and the necessary transfer of data between
themcanseverelyconstraintheoverallperformance. The
ﬁeld ofneuromorphic computing [2, 3] aims to improve
the eﬃciency of specialized hardware for ML by imitating
the structure of biological neural networks. The hope
is to realize devices that are as eﬃcient and massively
parallel as the brain, while using much faster physical
processes to carry out the information processing.
In particular, the idea of constructing neuromorphic
computing devices based on light has recently attracted a
lot of attention, as it promises to unlock all the beneﬁts of
optical computing: broad bandwidth, small latency, low
power consumption and natural parallelism [4]. Apart
from optics, other physical platforms have been consid-
ered too, such as spin-based devices or memristor circuits
[2].
Nonetheless, training such machines eﬃciently is still a
self-learning machinea b
physical learning machines
/uni03B8
nonlinear 
system /uni03B8
physical backpropagation
physical gradient update
feedback
learning 
parameters
Figure 1. Diﬀerent types of physical learning ma-
chines. (a) Physical learning machine requiring feedback
based on the outcome, to tune the internal "learning" param-
etersθ inside the physical device. (b) A self-learning machine
does not involve feedback. It updates the learning parameters
in a fully autonomous way (for example using physical back-
propagation and a physical gradient update; see main text).
challenging problem. The simplest method, shifting each
learning parameter individually and providing feedback
based on the outcomes, is very ineﬃcient, scaling linearly
in the number of parameters. Recently, a method using
a combination of a physical forward pass but digitally
simulated backpropagation was used successfully, but it
requires relatively faithful models of the physical dynam-
ics [5]. In another recent line of development, the concept
of equilibrium propagation was introduced [6], leading to
a local update rule for adapting weights based on a sys-
tem’s response under externally forced conditions, and it
was recently pointed out how to implement such ideas in
electronic systems by designing suitable components [7].
The best solution would be to realize aself-learning
machine - i.e. a learning machine that is trained by
means of entirely autonomous physical processes (Fig. 1),
without the use of feedback for updating the learning pa-
rameters and without any kind of external processing of
information (except possibly that needed for feeding the
training data). A ﬁrst step in this direction was already
arXiv:2103.04992v2  [cs.LG]  7 Feb 2023

===== PAGE 2 =====
2
suggested theoretically in a visionary paper by Psaltis et
al. [8] and later implemented to some degree [9–11]. In
Psaltis et al. [8], it was shown that it could be possible
to approximately realize the backpropagation algorithm
[12] in an optical neural network based on volume holo-
grams. However, the nonlinear elements must be engi-
neered so that the transmittance for the backpropagat-
ing signal matches the derivative of the transmittance
for the forward propagating signal, besides requiring a
carefully designed geometric arrangement [13]. To this
day, such stringent requirements have prevented a fully
developed practical implementation of the backpropaga-
tion algorithm in an optical learning machine [14].
Other learning machines based on Hebbian learning or
Spiking Timing-Dependent Synaptic Plasticity (STDSP)
would also fall under our deﬁnition of a self-learning ma-
chine, and restricted versions have been implemented,
e.g. optically [15]. Still, both Hebbian learning and
STDSP are motivated mainly by their plausibility in the
context of biological neural networks, and it has to be
seen in each case how well they optimize some training
objective. In soft-matter systems, ideas based on equi-
librium propagation have recently been explored [16].
In this work we consider SL machines based on clas-
sical Hamiltonian systems. We present a new training
procedure based on time reversal operations, which we
name Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation (HEB). As op-
posed to existing approaches, we do not need to consider
a particular implementation of a SL machine or care-
fully selected nonlinear elements; instead we present a
completely general procedure to train SL machines in a
wide class of physical systems. Indeed, HEB can realize
gradient descent and update of the learning parameters
via the dynamics inany time-reversible Hamiltonian sys-
tem, and it does so in an eﬃcient way that exploits the
parallelism of the learning machine. This new training
procedure opens up many exciting possibilities, making
it possible to construct self-learning machines in a wide
range of physical platforms. One the one hand, HEB
makes it feasible to realize SL devices based on already
mature technologies, such as integrated photonic circuits.
On the other hand, it expands the ﬁeld of SL machines
to new interesting physical platforms, such as clouds of
cold atoms or trains of optical pulses in a ﬁber loop.
Given how broad are the suﬃcient conditions for HEB
to work, we believe that it will instigate the discovery of
completely new physical learning machines. Moreover,
our training procedure is independent of the Hamiltonian
thatdescribesthedynamicsofthelearningmachine. Sur-
prisingly, one does not even need to know the dynamics
of the physical device in order to train it.
In the following, after deﬁning self-learning machines,
we will introduce the Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation
procedure and present a mathematical proof of its core
element. We will then discuss the ingredients of such a
machine, illustrate the learning approach in two numer-
ical examples, and ﬁnally comment on the prospects for
diﬀerent physical platforms.
II. SELF-LEARNING MACHINES
Deﬁnitions: Physical learning machines vs. physical
self-learning machines
A physical learning machinecan be deﬁned as a phys-
ical device provided with an internal memory that can
process an input to produce an output, such that the
functional dependence between the input and the out-
put is parameterized by the state of the internal mem-
ory. For example, a physical learning machine can be
a photonic circuit made of beam-splitters, nonlinear el-
ements and variable phase shifters. In this example, for
any input signal that enters the circuit, the output will
depend on the conﬁguration of the phase shifters, which
in this case represent the internal memory. In a phys-
ical learning machine, training is the process of ﬁnding
the optimal state of the internal memory to realize some
desired input-output relation.
There are several possible ways of training a physical
learning machine. It could be done entirely externally
(using numerical simulations) or by employing feedback,
i.e. external processing of the machine’s output to adapt
the parameters. However, this step may spoil some of
the advantages of using physical dynamics. Going be-
yond that, the most advanced version would consist in a
machine that uses an internal physical process for train-
ing.
We may thus deﬁne aself-learning machineas a phys-
ical learning machine that, when presented a data set,
can train itself in a fully autonomous way. During train-
ing, a self-learning machine receives a sequence of inputs
and some information about the target outputs. It is also
legitimate to realize a preset sequence of external oper-
ations on the SL machine or to supply energy. What is
not permissible is to give any kind of feedback dependent
on the internal state of the device. In this sense, a SL
machine is a black box: the user provides an input and
obtains an output, but requires neither knowledge of nor
access to the internal degrees of freedom.
In principle, physical (self-)learning machines could be
used for any machine learning task. It is customary to
classify machine learning tasks in three broad categories:
supervised learning, unsupervised learningand reinforce-
ment learning. In supervised learning, the task is to infer
a function that maps an input to an output based on la-
beled training data, which consists of example pairs of
an input object and an output (usually called thelabel).
In unsupervised learning, the goal is to ﬁnd patterns or
model the probability distribution of the training data
set, which unlike in the case of supervised learning is
not provided with labels. Finally, reinforcement learn-
ing comprises all tasks in which an intelligent agent has
to take actions in an environment in order to maximize
some reward. In this paper we concentrate on supervised
learning, although there may also be exciting venues in
the application of physical learning machines to unsu-
pervised or reinforcement learning. Therefore, the self-

===== PAGE 3 =====
3
learning machines that we consider throughout this pa-
per are those that can learn autonomously when they are
provided with pairs of input-output data.
To avoid confusion, we should repeat that in our
manuscript "self-learning" refers to an autonomous phys-
ical training procedure, as opposed to the computer sci-
ence terms, "unsupervised", "self-supervised" or "rein-
forcement" learning, which refer to the type of training
task.
Diﬀerent types of physical learning
The idea of constructing specialized physical hardware
for machine learning, i.e. neuromorphic devices, has
been explored in various physics-based platforms [2, 3].
What we deﬁne as physical learning machines have been
studied theoretically and for some cases already demon-
strated experimentally in the context of photonic hard-
ware [9, 10, 17, 18], memristor circuits [19–21], super-
conducting circuits [22], and spintronic devices [23–25],
among others. However, as pointed out above, learning
is still a challenge. In many platforms, the focus has been
on demonstrating individual components and ingredients
believed to be useful for both inference and learning, or
on implementing larger-scale devices, but without in-situ
training.
The space of potential learning rules is large. We may
subdivide it in several ways. For our purposes, the two
most signiﬁcant questions are whether any given learning
approach is based directly onoptimization and whether
the learning rule is local. Importantly, there is an overlap
between these two categories, and we will be interested
in that overlap region, since it promises the ability to ob-
tain learning updates by physical dynamics (local rule)
and at the same time have a rigorous mathematical foun-
dation (being based on optimization). Another question
is whether the update of the learning parameters requires
external feedback and processingor can beimplemented
by physical dynamics autonomously.
There is a broad category of neuromorphic devices
that makes use of learning rules inspired by biological
neural networks. This corpus of ideas started histori-
cally with Hebbian learning and it can be summarized
in the motto ’neurons that ﬁre together, wire together’.
A more sophisticated version in the context of spiking
neurons is the so-called spike-timing-dependent synaptic
plasticity (STDP). This has been suggested as a learn-
ing mechanism in several neuromorphic hardware plat-
forms, e.g. for spintronic devices (see simulations in [26]),
for memristors (see implementation of a building block
in [27]), and for superconducting circuits [22], and even
optoelectronic-superconducting hybrid systems [28]. Im-
portantly, these learning rules are always local in order to
be biologically plausible (i.e. the update in the learning
parameters is a function of only the nearest-neighbour
neurons). However, the simplest versions of the Hebbian
learning rule are in general not guaranteed to minimize
some cost function, and they show a poor performance
when applied to deep learning architectures.
It is, therefore, remarkable that there have been recent
discussions of biologically inspired learning algorithms
that have been shown to approximately or exactly min-
imize a cost function that measures the deviation from
the desired behaviour. Thus, such approaches would fall
in the particularly interesting region of overlap we men-
tioned above. Sometimes, these are more abstract con-
ceptual ideas (like the free-energy principle of the brain
[29]), while other approaches may be more concrete, re-
lating to particular situations like recurrent networks of a
certain structure [30]. There are interesting models that
combine local rules with top-down signals in biologically
plausible models, whose learning dynamics approximates
backpropagation under certain conditions [31]. The area
of backpropagation-like mechanisms that may be oper-
ating in the brain has been reviewed recently in [32]. In
general, though, all these approaches, while very interest-
ing, are not straightforward to implement physically in
simple neuromorphic devices and their hardware imple-
mentation would presumably require careful design and,
often, tailored electronic components.
Optimization of a cost function is of course at the core
of deep learning in artiﬁcial neural networks. There, the
required gradients of the cost function with respect to the
learning parameters inside the network can be eﬃciently
calculated using the backpropagation algorithm. Unfor-
tunately, this algorithm is nonlocal. The update of any
weight has a complicated nonlocal dependence on any
other neuron in the network. It is therefore not a priori
obvious how to implement backpropagation physically.
In the domain of machine learning, the concept of so-
called contrastive learning is at the basis of local update
rules that could replace backpropagation. In general, for
contrastive learning the learning update is the diﬀerence
between two contributions obtained in diﬀerent learning
phases. This was ﬁrst employed to suggest an alternative
tobackpropagationinso-called’learningbyrecirculation’
[33] and then more recently generalized and extended,
leading eventually to the idea of equilibrium propaga-
tion [6]. In equilibrium propagation, one considers a sys-
tem which relaxes into some steady state, given exter-
nal forces that represent inputs and outputs for a given
training sample. Two learning phases are distinguished,
where the outputs are free or are nudged towards their
desired values. The diﬀerence between the network acti-
vations in these two phases deﬁnes the weight update, in
a local way. This procedure overcomes many problems
of earlier similar ideas, and it implements backpropaga-
tion for the optimization of a cost function. While it was
ﬁrst suggested as a principled, local alternative to back-
propagation, without immediate ideas on hardware real-
izations, there has been recent work on possible imple-
mentations of this (and related) ideas, both in electronic
circuits [7] and in soft-matter systems [16]. In contrast to
the method we will describe, the basic assumption here is
always that the system relaxes to an equilibrium steady

===== PAGE 4 =====
4
state (or begins to relax towards that state), for each
presented training example.
LOCAL LEARNING RULES
OPTIMIZATION
PHYSICAL 
BACKPROP
HAMILTONIAN INDEPENDENT 
SELF-LEARNING
BACKPROPAGATION
SELF-LEARNING
Our 
work Psaltis et al.
Guo et al.
Hughes et al.
Bengio et al.
Hebbian
McMahon et al.
Shen et al.
Frinston
Bellec et al.
STDP
Figure 2. Overview: The landscape of physical learn-
ing machines. Our work falls into the broad class of opti-
mization approaches. It belongs to the small class of works
that involve both physical backpropagation and self-learning,
but in contrast to other approaches our scheme is universal,
i.e. independent of the speciﬁc Hamiltonian. (some related
works, see main text: Shen et al [17], Guo et al [18], Skinner
et al [11], Psaltis et al [8, 10]).
The problem of training
In some of the earlier attempts (like [11]), training was
performed in silico, by means of numerical simulations.
The problem with this approach is that the size of the
learning machine is limited by the computational power
required to simulate the physical hardware. Moreover,
training is performed for an idealized model of the actual
physical hardware. As a result, fabrication imperfections
cannot be taken into account. This has been addressed
recently by introducing a hybrid approach, combining
physical forward propagation on actual hardware with
backpropagation using simulation [5].
A general approach to remedy this shortcoming is to
employ feedback.
The simplest feedback-based training technique uses
a ﬁnite-diﬀerence approximation to the gradient of the
cost function. This can be realized physically in a very
simple manner: (1) estimate the cost functionC for the
current state of the learning parameters, (2) change the
i-th parameter by a small amount and estimateC again,
(3) add the diﬀerence of these results to thei-th param-
eter. However, this idea is far from optimal, since the
number of evaluations needed scales with the number of
parameters.
Towards physical self-learning machines
As described above, ideally we would want to both ob-
tain the required training update of the learning param-
eters and eventually also implement that update using
only autonomous physical dynamics.
In this subsection we are going to review those previ-
ous developments along this line that we feel are most
closely related to our idea. They happen to be in the op-
tical domain – not surprisingly, given the coherent, time-
reversible character of wave propagation.
We know that the backpropagation algorithm that
forms the cornerstone of artiﬁcial neural network train-
ing can extract the required parameter update (the gra-
dient of the cost function) using only two evaluations of
the network, independent of the number of parameters.
A crucial improvement of a physical learning machine
therefore consists in realizing the backpropagation algo-
rithm by physical means, even in cases where the even-
tual update is implemented by other means. This idea
was ﬁrst introduced in Wagner et al. [8], in the context of
optical neural networks. In a typical optical neural net-
work, an optical ﬁeld propagates inside some nonlinear
medium with elements that provide controllable phase
shifts. The controllable phase shifts play the role of the
learning weights. The optical ﬁeld would be injected at
the input and propagate towards the output. The idea
advocated in [8] then is to create a physicalerror signal
that propagates in the opposite direction, from output to
input. The error signal is prepared according to the dif-
ference of the output of the device and the desired target
output. Without going into any further detail (we refer
to the original paper), in their approach the backward-
propagating weak error signal interferes with the strong
forward-propagating optical ﬁeld. In this way, for the
speciﬁc choice of optical nonlinearities in their setup it
was possible to ensure that the error signal is (approxi-
mately) equal at any point of the device to the required
gradient of the cost function.
Once the error signal is prepared, one can measure it
and use the result to update the parameters via feedback.
All learning parameters could be updated at once, in a
fully parallel fashion. This idea was originally proposed
for optical neural networks using Kerr nonlinearities [8],
but it was recently extended to setups that employ sat-
urable absorption for the activation function [18]. In a
similar spirit, in Hermans et al [34], the idea of physical
backpropagation is used to train a physical linear system
with controllable nonlinear feedback. An optical imple-
mentation based on this concept was demonstrated in a
follow-up paper [35]. A related idea by Hughes, Fan et

===== PAGE 5 =====
5
al. [36] uses an auxiliary circuit to backpropagate the
error signal. A recent paper proposes a training method
that combines in-situ measurements with digital back-
propagation [5]. Other implementations only train the
last layer, in a similar fashion to reservoir computing.
Nonetheless, there is a potential drawback in using
feedback to update the learning parameters. The error
signal has to be measured in order to update the learn-
ing weights. If that is done by means of electronic sen-
sors, that could potentially introduce a bottleneck. The
potential advantage of using ultrafast physical dynam-
ics for evaluating the network could be lost because of
a relatively slow electronic response. In addition, some
of these approaches require further computation steps.
These problems can be addressed if the error signal could
directly inﬂuence the learning parameters via physical
dynamics, without external feedback.
The possibility of using a physical mechanism to up-
datethelearningparametersautonomouslywasproposed
for the ﬁrst time also in the above-mentioned work by
Wagner and Psaltis [8]. In their paper, they consider a
setup in which the learning parameters are recorded in
the form of a hologram in a photorefractive material. In
thisway, theinterferencebetweentheerrorsignalandthe
forward-propagating beam could in principle provide the
means to update the holographic recording in the right
way. A simple version was partially demonstrated in a
linear optical device in a follow-up paper by Li, Psaltis
et al [9]. However, that experimental setup did actually
still involve some form of feedback.
The ideas ﬁrst advanced in [8] could potentially lead to
ultrafast training and a huge density of interconnections
between neurons. By combining physical backpropaga-
tion with an autonomous process to update the parame-
ters according to the error signal, it would be possible to
realize self-learning machines. Nevertheless, all presently
existing proposals for physical backpropagation are suit-
ableonlyforsomesetupswithveryspeciﬁcnonlinearities.
In some cases, such as [8] or [18], it is required that the
forward propagating beams and the error signal experi-
ence a diﬀerent dynamics at the nonlinear elements, that
nonetheless has to be matched in a precise way. What is
more, recording the learning parameters in a holographic
pattern requires a very careful engineering of the geome-
try of the device [13]. In other cases, such as [11], phys-
ical backpropagation is only realized approximately in a
particular limit.
In this work, we show how to realize self-learning (i.e.
the combination of physical backpropagation and au-
tonomous parameter update) in a much broader set of
physical systems. Since our idea does not rely on a spe-
ciﬁc choice of the system, it is not restricted to optical
setups. Hence, it could be applied to many other possible
platforms, ranging from cold atom clouds to solid state
spin networks. In fact, the training procedure that we
propose is a sequence of operations that do not even de-
pend on the particular dynamics of the device, provided
that some weak assumptions are met. Essentially, we
only require that the physical learning machine is based
on a time-reversible nonlinear Hamiltonian system.
III. OVERVIEW OF HAMILTONIAN ECHO
BACKPROPAGATION
The main contribution of this paper is to introduce
a new technique for self-learning in Hamiltonian sys-
tems, which we term Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation
(HEB, for short). Before moving to the more technical
sections, we provide here a high-level overview of HEB.
A. Requirements
Let us be more precise about the requirements for the
implementation of a self-learning machine based on HEB.
Hamiltonian systems – First of all, we only con-
sider Hamiltonian systems, where the dynamical degrees
of freedom consist in the learning parameters and the
variables needed to process the information. From the
point of view of the physical realization, requiring Hamil-
tonian dynamics means that the timescale of dissipation
in the self-learning device must be much larger than the
time interval between the injection of the input and the
production of the output (for a given training sample).
Since we aim to use fast dynamical processes, this seems
to be a reasonable requirement. In fact, many of the
previous proposals for physical learning machines can be
modeled as Hamiltonian systems, e.g. the optical neural
networks using Kerr nonlinearity.
Time-reversal symmetry– Second, we require that
the self-learning device obeys time-reversal symmetry. It
is worth noting that time-reversal symmetry is not a very
restrictive property: all mechanical and optical systems
with arbitrary nonlinear dynamics are time-reversal in-
variant in the absence of magnetic ﬁelds and in the ab-
sence of spontaneous time-reversal symmetry breaking
(i.e. magnetization).
For the purposes of our paper, we will deﬁne a Hamil-
tonian self-learning machine to be a self-learning machine
that is Hamiltonian and time-reversible.
Time-reversal operation– Third, we need the abil-
ity to physically implement a time-reversal operation. In
the case of wave ﬁelds, that would be a phase-conjugation
mirror, an operation which has been demonstrated in
nonlinear optics. This can be implemented outside the
core of the device.
Decay step – Fourth, we need the ability to imple-
ment another operation, the so-called decay step, to be
explained below. Essentially, this is when the force im-
parted on the learning variables gets converted into a
shift of those variables. Again, this can be implemented
outside the core of the device.
These are the only general requirements needed for
the implementation of self-learning machines based on
the Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation technique. Any

===== PAGE 6 =====
6
other more detailed suggestions regarding physical imple-
mentations made in the remainder of the manuscript only
serve to highlight opportunities for optimizing the per-
formance – similar to discussions in deep learning where
one should distinguish the essential concepts, i.e. gra-
dient descent and backpropagation, from suggestions for
improved network architectures.
B. Basic steps of Hamiltonian echo
backpropagation
WeexplainhereallthestepsneededtoimplementHEB
in what is probably the most practical scenario, which
is when wave ﬁelds are transmitted through a nonlinear
setup. In this setup, wave ﬁelds represent both learning
variables, to be updated during training, and evaluation
variables, participating in the information processing re-
quired to map input to output. Both types of wave ﬁelds
enter a physical system (thenonlinear core), in which
they interact to produce an output wave ﬁeld. The only
requirement that we impose on the nonlinear core is that
the evolution of the ﬁelds inside it is described by a time-
reversible Hamiltonian.
Apart from the nonlinear core, the self-learning de-
vice requires a few well-deﬁned external operations that
are applied on the wave ﬁelds that have been transmit-
ted through the device. However, we need no control on
the nonlinear core, which can be thought of as a black
box. Since all the external operations depend only on the
output ﬁelds and not on the internal degrees of freedom
or the details of the dynamics inside the nonlinear core,
we will call this a Hamiltonian-independent self-learning
machine.
Suppose that we consider the usual supervised learning
scenario, with a dataset consisting of pairs of inputs and
target outputs, and we want to train the device to ap-
proximate the input-output relation given by these sam-
ples. We proceed to enumerate the steps in a single train-
ing iteration of HEB.
1) The ﬁrst step is to draw a random sample from the
input dataset and prepare the evaluation ﬁeld accord-
ingly.
2) Forward pass:send both the evaluation ﬁeld and
the learning ﬁeld into the nonlinear core and let them
interact there. This is where the essence of the nonlinear
information processing (and, later, learning process) will
take place.
3) Both ﬁelds have again emerged from the system,
propagating outwards as wave ﬁelds. We now inject a
small error signal on top of the evaluation ﬁeld. This
signal is proportional to the desired output of this train-
ing sample. Note that this prescription covers the case of
the most well-known cost function, the mean square loss,
and it corresponds mathematically to injecting a signal
proportional to the gradient of the cost function with re-
spect to the output ﬁeld. Other cost functions can be
implemented as well, as we will show.
4) Time-reversal Operation: This is performed by
phase-conjugating both wave ﬁelds, which at this point
are outside the nonlinear core. More generally, it means
reversingthemomentaofthephysicaldegreesoffreedom.
5) Backward pass: As a result of the time-reversal
operation, the ﬁelds will propagate back into the nonlin-
ear core, where they will interact again (we will call this
the backward pass).
(6) Now the evaluation ﬁeld leaves the device near the
input port (it will be substituted by the next input).
However, the learning ﬁeld is retained, and asecond
time-reversal operationis now enacted on this learn-
ing ﬁeld, again outside the device. This will eventually
re-inject the learning ﬁeld into the device, together with
the next input sample.
7) Decay step:In a Hamiltonian setting, the degrees
of freedom of any ﬁeld can be decomposed into the ﬁeld
amplitude and its canonically conjugate momentum; for
the optical case, these correspond to the two ﬁeld quadra-
tures. As we shall prove in our work, the canonical mo-
mentum of the learning ﬁeld after the steps described
above is proportional to the gradient of the cost function,
i.e. exactly what is needed in a gradient-descent learn-
ing algorithm! The purpose of this ﬁnal step is to con-
vert the canonical momentum (i.e. the ﬁeld quadrature
whose sign we have ﬂipped during the time-reversal op-
eration) into a change of the ﬁeld amplitude and quench
the momentum to zero in the process. We call this the
decay step, since it is the only step in which dissipation
is introduced. As this step takes place outside the non-
linear physical system (just like the time-reversal opera-
tion itself), it can be realized in an engineered way with-
out destroying the Hamiltonian-independence advertised
above. Furthermore, since it is realized outside the non-
linear core one can control the learning rate in a simple
manner.
We will discuss all of these steps in the following and
provide proofs for the claims made here. Nevertheless,
we can already oﬀer an insight of why the full proce-
dure works. Consider that we wanted to evaluate the
gradient by the ﬁnite-diﬀerence method. In this case, we
would have to slightly shift one of the learning ﬁelds and
query the resulting response. Such a shift would result
in a weak perturbation of the ﬁelds during the forward
pass that would ultimately result in a small change of
the value of the cost function with respect to the case
of unperturbed ﬁelds. Now we would have to repeat this
process for every learning degree of freedom to obtain the
full learning gradient, which is one of the reasons why, as
weexplainedabove, theﬁnite-diﬀerencemethodishugely
ineﬃcient. But since we consider systems with time re-
versal symmetry, we can instead inject an error signal
in the output, followed by a time-reversal operation. In
this case, the wave ﬁelds evolve to a time-reversed replica
of the input that is perturbed by a weak error signal.
Because of the reciprocity principle [37], the linear re-
sponse of the (nonlinear!) system in the forward pass is
in fact related to the linear response of the system in the

===== PAGE 7 =====
7
backward pass. Therefore, we can obtain the required
gradient by injecting a signal from the output, instead
of perturbing the input. This is the essence of the idea
underlying our approach.
Our method shares with the approach of equilibrium
propagation [6] the general idea of exploiting a diﬀerence
between two contributions: in our case, this would be
the diﬀerence of the force imposed on the learning ﬁeld
between the forward pass and the backward pass. The
diﬀerence is automatically produced by the physical dy-
namics since we employ a time-reversal operation. In
contrast to equilibrium propagation, we do not have to
engineer further the dynamics inside the device to pro-
duce an update according to such a diﬀerence. Another
distinction is that we work with a system out of equilib-
rium where we do not have to wait for it to relax to any
steady state (nor would we want that, since our method
relies on dissipation being absent or at least very small).
Our method shares with the approach of Psaltis and
Wagner [8] the idea of employing a time-reversal opera-
tion. However, in our case, we apply time-reversal to the
full nonlinear wave ﬁeld, as opposed to only an injected
weak error signal. This diﬀerence ultimately means that
they had to engineer the forward and backward transmis-
sions inside the device components in a particular way,
while our approach is completely general.
We observe at this point that none of the exter-
nal procedures that are employed during an HEB it-
eration depends on the Hamiltonian of the nonlinear
core. Therefore, we introduce the following deﬁnition.
A Hamiltonian-independent self-learning machine is a
Hamiltonian self-learning machine in which the train-
ing procedure is independent of the Hamiltonian. By
this statement, we mean that the training procedure can
minimize the cost function for any Hamiltonian that is
time-reversible. This is another important diﬀerence to
equilibrium propagation as well as the approach of Wag-
ner and Psaltis.
To the best of our knowledge, our proposal consti-
tutes the ﬁrst example of an approach to construct
Hamiltonian-independent self-learning machines. Since
the training procedure does not depend on the particular
form of the Hamiltonian, the self-learning machine can be
regarded as a black box. As opposed to other physical
learning machines in the literature, its implementation
in the laboratory does not even need a detailed knowl-
edge of the internal dynamics of the device in order to
make it work. There are only few mechanisms that could
disrupt an experimental implementation: a mechanism
that in some way breaks time-reversal symmetry of the
Hamiltonian (including an unwanted dissipation or noise
channel) , or signiﬁcant imperfections in the implemen-
tation of the time-reversal operation or the decay step.
IV. HAMILTONIAN ECHO
BACKPROPAGATION
A. Dynamical variables and Hamiltonian
Our setup for a SL machine consists of two basic in-
gredients: dynamical variables that are used to process
the information (theevaluation variables), and dynami-
cal variables that contain the learning parameters.
The evaluation variables will be combined into a single
dynamical vector, Ψ(t). In a similar way, the collection
of all the learning parameters is denoted as a vectorΘ(t).
Such vectors can represent any collection of physical de-
grees of freedom in a Hamiltonian system, from inter-
acting spins to optical ﬁelds. For the present discussion,
we imagine discrete models with a countable number of
degrees of freedom. However, the approach also covers
the case of continuous ﬁelds (with straightforward slight
changes in the notation).
The input to the device is given by the initial conﬁg-
uration of the evaluation variables,Ψ(−T ), whereas the
output is given by its state at a later time,Ψ(0). We
choose the initial time to be−T for reasons that will
become clear later. The learning parameters,Θ(t), will
interact with the evaluation variables and overall change
slowly during training.
For example, consider a self-learning machine whereΨ
and Θ are nonlinear wave ﬁelds. These could be realized
as a lattice of optical cavities or spins. We can imagine
the operation of the SL machine as a nonlinear scattering
experiment, where the inputΨ(−T ) is a wave packet. As
the wave packet propagates inside the device, it evolves
under the eﬀect of the nonlinear self-interaction and the
interactionwiththelearningparameters. Finally, anout-
put wave packet is obtained att = 0. The output state
of Ψ is a nonlinear function of the input, and it has a
parametric dependence on the initial conﬁguration of the
learning parameters, Θ(−T ), much like an artiﬁcial neu-
ral network (ANN).
We can capture the dynamics of the SL machine during
both the forward and backward pass in a single Hamil-
tonian:
HSL =Hψ +Hint +Hθ. (1)
Let us inspect one by one what each term means. Some
of the technical details will be more fully explained later.
Hψ is the Hamiltonian that describes the evolution of
Ψ alone, in the absence of interaction withΘ. In general,
it will have self-interaction (non-quadratic) terms. The
second term,Hint, contains the interaction ofΘ and Ψ.
In general,Hψ +Hint must be a time-reversible Hamil-
tonian, but there is no further constraint. In accordance
with previous proposals for physical learning machines,
we may assume that, for example,Ψ is an optical ﬁeld in-
side a nonlinear medium. The nonlinear response of such
a medium may correspond, among many other possible
choices, to a Kerr-like nonlinearity.

===== PAGE 8 =====
8
The third term, Hθ, describes the dynamics of Θ in
the absence of interaction withΨ. For the sake of gen-
erality, we consider thatΘ may have an arbitrary self-
interaction. Therefore,HSL is completely arbitrary.
B. Gradient descent as a goal
Suppose that Θ is initialized in some random conﬁg-
uration Θ(−T ). Now, we prepare Ψ in the input state,
and we let it interact withΘ. After a time intervalT,
we will obtain the output state. The error in the output
is quantiﬁed by means of a cost function. In general, a
cost functioncan be any function
C(Ψ(0), Ψtarget) =C(Ψ(−T ), Ψtarget, Θ(−T )) (2)
of the outputΨ(0) and its corresponding target conﬁgu-
ration that is minimized when both are equal. The func-
tion displayed here is the sample-speciﬁc cost function.
The training procedure will try to minimize its sample-
averaged version (averaging over all training input sam-
ples Ψ(−T ) that are provided alongside their respective
target Ψtarget). After averaging, the cost function still
depends on the learning variablesΘ(−T ), since these de-
termine the mapping from input to output.
For reasons that will become apparent later, we take
our cost function to have units of energy (and in fact
it will represent a physical Hamiltonian later in this sec-
tion). In order to improve the performance of the SL ma-
chine, we have to minimize the cost function. In princi-
ple, the problem of optimizing the cost function is a very
hard nonlinear optimization problem, but in the context
of ML it is usually suﬃcient to ﬁnd a local minimum.
In the context of ANN’s, this is normally done by the
stochastic gradient descent method. In this method, the
gradient of the cost function is computed (for one or sev-
eral randomly chosen training samples) and the learning
parameters are subsequently updated, according to the
rule
θ(Tf) =θ(−T )−η ∂C
∂θ(−T ). (3)
C. Introducing Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation
Our goal is to realize the stochastic gradient update
rule in a fully autonomous way, via physical dynamics.
The sample-speciﬁc cost function depends on the output
and the target state. For this reason, if one hopes to im-
plement gradient descent without external intervention,
some information about the output must be sentback-
wards from the output to the input. This immediately
suggests the use of a time reversal operation, which was
already recognized in early proposals [8], although it was
employed in a manner diﬀerent than what we will de-
scribe now.
To understand the qualitative idea of our approach, we
start from a general observation that is well known from
discussions of backpropagation in ANNs. The change of
the cost function induced by a small change in a learning
parameter θ is given by
δC = 2δθRe
{∂Ψ(0)
∂θ
∂C
∂Ψ(0)
}
(4)
In other words, we need to know both the perturbation
in the output conﬁgurationδΨ(0) = ∂Ψ(0)
∂θ produced by
a small parameter change, as well as the "error signal"
∂C
∂Ψ(0) at the output.
Since we consider weak perturbations,δΨ(0) can be
understood in terms of the linear response of the sys-
tem. In other words, δΨ(0) is in fact proportional to
the Green’s function associated with the linearized equa-
tions of motion. At this point we can introduce the most
important idea of our approach: if we physically time-
reverse the whole ﬁeldΨ, we can instead interpret the
error signal, ∂C
∂Ψ(0) as the source of a perturbation that is
"riding on top of" the time-reversed nonlinear wave ﬁeld
(see Fig. 3). This is at the heart of our new procedure
to realize self-learning, "Hamiltonian Echo Backpropaga-
tion" (HEB).
As we will see later, the idea is related to the fact
that in a linear system of diﬀerential equations there is a
symmetry between the source of a ﬁeld att and its eﬀect
at t′ (the so-called self-reciprocity principle) [37].
Let us go through the individual steps of the HEB
procedure. First, Ψ is prepared in the input state, at
timet =−T. Note that we choose to start the process at
timet =−T tomakeexplicitthetime-reversalsymmetry.
Thus, the output is produced att = 0, and the echo of
the input will form att = T. In order to simplify the
calculations, let us also assume ﬁrst that the canonical
momentum of θ is initially zero. After the interaction
between Ψ and Θ, we obtain an output ﬁeldΨ(0).
In the next instant, we need a way to inject the error
signal required for the subsequent backward pass. This
we achieve by imposing onΨ an interaction Hamiltonian
proportional to the (sample-speciﬁc) cost function, given
the desired target ﬁeld conﬁguration. We assume that
the duration of this interaction,ϵ, is small enough. In
practice, this implies that the ﬁeld is slightly changed
according to Ψ(0)→ Ψ(0)−iϵ∂Ψ∗(0)C
Before going further in the discussion of HEB, let us
introduce a useful notation we will employ in the rest of
the paper. In order to make our equations more com-
pact, we condense each pair of canonical coordinates in a
single complex variable. We will reserve the capital greek
letters for the complex variables, as follows:Ψ =ψ+iπψ,
Θ = θ +iπθ, where the canonical coordinates and mo-
menta have been rescaled to obtain the same dimension
(nominally, square root of an action). This will make the

===== PAGE 9 =====
9
ab
x
t
Ψ
Ψ↦Ψ*
δΨ
δΨ
δΘ
δΘ
time reversal
input
output
-T
0
-T
T
0
Figure 3. Physical backpropagation and physical gra-
dient update.(a) Forward pass (nonlinear evolution) of the
"evaluation" wave ﬁeldΨ in the presence of a background
potential landscape provided by a "learning ﬁeld"Θ. Any
small perturbation δΘ will aﬀect the output, as indicated
here, which in turn changes the value of the cost function.
(b) Instead of testing the cost function response for many
potential updates of the learning ﬁeldΘ, Hamiltonian Echo
Backpropagation automatically produces the required update
in a single backward pass, via physical dynamics. After ap-
plying a time-reversal operation (Ψ↦→ Ψ∗), the subsequent
nonlinear wave ﬁeld evolution is a time-reversed version of
the forward pass. A small variationδΨ injected on top can
now be used to backpropagate the error signal (variation of
the cost function at the output); see main text. This then
leads to the required update of the learning ﬁeldθ, via the
physical interaction between Ψ and θ, realizing a fully au-
tonomous learning machine.
notation for the time-reversal especially convenient, as
it corresponds to a complex conjugation of the dynam-
ical variables. Furthermore, one can easily check that
Hamilton’s equations can now be written in a particu-
larly convenient manner:
˙Ψ =−i∂Ψ∗H,
where one has to formally treat Ψ, Ψ∗ as independent
variables (or more technically,∂Ψ∗ represents a Wirtinger
partial derivative).
As a concrete example, let us assume that our cost
function is simply the overlap between the target state
and the output state. Then, the prescription above tells
us we just have to inject a weak perturbation propor-
tional to the target state:δΨ(0)∝iϵΨtarget.
After this step, we time-reverse , which in our com-
plex notation means to phase conjugate the ﬁelds, e.g.
Ψ→ Ψ∗. In the limit ϵ→ 0, Ψ will evolve backwards
preciselytotheinputconﬁguration, becausetheHamilto-
nian is time-reversal-invariant. However, whenϵ is small
but ﬁnite, we obtain a small variation in the ﬁelds, both
in Ψ and Θ. One can understand such variation as a per-
turbation traveling on top of the time-reversed ﬁeld, from
output to input. Once the back-propagation is complete,
one obtains a slightly perturbed echo of bothΨ and Θ,
att =T. Since we have perturbed the ﬁeld att = 0, the
echo is not perfect: there is a small variation given by
Θ(T ) = Θ∗(−T ) +δΘ(T ). In order to have the correct
sign for the momentum of the learning ﬁeld required for
ourapproach, wetimereverseagain, Θ(T )→ Θ∗(T ). Us-
ing the self-reciprocity principle, one can then show that
the ﬁnal conﬁguration ofΘ in the echo step is simply
given by
Θ(T ) =θ(−T )−iϵ ∂C
∂Θ∗(−T ). (5)
We will show below how to prove that result, which en-
capsulates the central idea of our proposal, mathemati-
cally (Sec.V).
We note that the procedure introduced here diﬀers
in an important way from previous approaches to self-
learning dynamics [8], which never considered a full time-
reversal of the nonlinear wave ﬁeld and instead treated
a weak perturbation traveling against a strong forward-
propagating ﬁeld. It is a consequence of this choice
that these approaches work only for some speciﬁc care-
fully chosen wave dynamics, and not in the general,
Hamiltonian-independent way that we outline here.
TheﬁnalstepofHEBwillbetheupdateofthelearning
ﬁeld, to be discussed now.
D. The decay step (physical learning ﬁeld update)
At this step, the dynamics of the learning ﬁeldΘ al-
most looks like gradient descent, but not completely: we
have been able to impart a momentum kick toΘ that
is proportional to the gradient of the cost function, but
what we really want is to update the positionθ. We now
need to convert the update in the canonical momentum
into a shift in the position, and at the same time we need
to let the momentum decay to zero. For this purpose,
we need to realize some form of dissipation during this
part of the training process, which we call thedecay step.
This can be done by couplingΘ to a reservoir.
While we need dissipation during the decay step, the
dynamics during the forward and backward pass must be
time-reversible. The conceptually simplest way to resolve
this conﬂict is to have the ability to switch dissipation on
and oﬀ. In principle, we can do so by controlling the cou-
pling ofΘ to the reservoir, and many physical implemen-
tations (e.g. all approaches related to laser cooling ideas)
are possible. The fact that we need dissipation during the
decay step is not surprising, because we have only used
Hamiltonian evolution and time reversals so far, while
the overall gradient descent procedure is contractive.
In general, therefore, during the decay step we need to
switch on a dissipative interaction
HSL,decay =HSL +Hθ,decay (6)
where Hθ,decay is a term that couplesθ to the dissi-
pative bath. Additionally, Hθ,decay in general needs to

===== PAGE 10 =====
10
contain other simple non-dissipative terms that control
the evolution during the dissipative phase.
We will now explain this step by means of a simpli-
ﬁed example that contains all the key ingredients needed.
Later on, in section VIC, we will provide a more detailed
prescription how the desired eﬀect outlined here can be
obtained in the concrete case of wave ﬁelds.
Inourexample, weassumethatthedynamicsof Θdur-
ing the decay step corresponds to a free-particle Hamil-
tonian with damping:
˙θ = Ωπθ
˙πθ =−Γ(t)πθ
(Note that in our conventionπ2
θ has units of action, which
implies that Ω has units of frequency). Furthermore, we
assume that the eﬀect of dissipation may be modelled
by a damping force of the form−Γ(t)πθ, where Γ(t) can
be controlled in a time-dependent fashion. The stable
manifold would be given by the particle at rest at any
location, withπθ = 0.
During this ﬁnal step of the HEB procedure, we switch
on the dissipation, ˙πθ =−Γπθ, and apart from that we
let Θ evolve freely. If we wait long enough, the ﬁnal con-
ﬁguration ofΘ is given byθ(−T ) +ϵ ∂C
∂πθ(−T)−ϵ Ω
Γ
∂C
∂θ(−T)
(to ﬁrst order inϵ), while the canonical momentum de-
cays to zero. The update step ﬁnishes in the end of the
decay step, at timeTf≫ Γ−1. In the limit of large de-
cay times, i.e. Ω
Γ≫ ∂C
∂πθ(−T)
(
∂C
∂θ(−T)
)−1
, we recover the
usual gradient descent update rule
θ(Tf) =θ(−T )−η ∂C
∂θ(−T ), (7)
with a learning rate given byη = ϵ Ω
Γ. Repeating this
procedure in a sequential way, for many injected training
samples, will realize stochastic gradient descent (SGD).
Apparently, the learning rate is proportional toϵ, which
represents the duration during which the "cost function
Hamiltonian" is active.
We must remark that in the general case, when the dy-
namics ofΘ is not necessarily equivalent to a free-particle
with damping, the relation ofη to ϵ may be diﬀerent.
However, we can always expect these two quantities to
be proportional, due to the assumption of injecting only
a weak perturbation.
In practice, the way in which the decay step is per-
formed would depend on the architecture of the self-
learning machine. We can envisage two main possibil-
ities, which are illustrated in ﬁgure 4.
Before we discuss these possibilities, weemphasizethat
it is important to have an overall dynamics where the de-
generacy between diﬀerent values of the learning ﬁeld is
only broken by the training samples, and not by the in-
trinsic dynamics of the device. After all, the learning
parameters Θ must be able to change continuously be-
tween diﬀerent states during training.
Ψ
Θ
t −T0T
Ψ
t −T0T
a
b  
Θ
Decay step
Decay step
Decay step
Decay step
Sample #1Sample #2
Sample #1Sample #2
Time  
reversal
Figure 4. Diﬀerent possible architectures of the self-
learning machine. We illustrate the diﬀerent possible con-
ﬁgurationsofthelearningandevaluationdynamicalvariables,
for the case of a setup consisting of wave ﬁelds interacting in
1D. We consider that the SL device is in the highlighted re-
gion, which is where the nonlinear interaction given byHSL
takes place. If both the input and output of both ﬁelds are
injected from outside, all the time reversals and decay steps
can be performed externally, and there is freedom to choose
Hθ,bath. If not, the Hamiltonian of the SL device,HSL, has
to be engineered to have a continuously degenerate ground
state in Θ. (a) Both Ψ(−T ) and Θ(−T ) are wave packets
injected from outside the SL device. (b) The inputΨ(−T )
is a wave packet injected from outside the device, butΘ is
conﬁned inside.
Learning ﬁeld transmitted through the nonlin-
ear core– The ﬁrst possibility, illustrated in ﬁgure 4(a),
is that bothΘand Ψare wave ﬁelds that enter in the self-
learning device from outside, evolve according toHSL,
and then ﬁnally produce an output wave ﬁeld. In this
case, the echo of bothΘ and Ψ is produced outside the
device. Therefore, all the operations needed to realize of
the decay step can be performed externally, and there is
freedom to choose the most suitable form ofHθ,decay. In
this situation, the procedure is completely Hamiltonian-
independent, since the operations required to implement
Hθ,decay are the same for any time-reversible Hamilto-
nian self-learning device. In this case, even when the
training is ﬁnished, one must keep time-reversingΘ and
performing decay steps in order to keep it around the
optimal conﬁguration. In the absence of an error signal
injected at the output, the time-reversed evolution dur-
ing the backward pass will exactly undo any evolution
during the forward pass, regardless of the Hamiltonian
of the nonlinear core. Therefore, the learning ﬁeld will
keep stable once the training is ﬁnished. The only con-
ditions to impose are on the Hamiltonian governing the
dissipative dynamics outside the device,Hθ,decay, which

===== PAGE 11 =====
11
must not break the degeneracy between diﬀerent values
ofθ (unlike the HamiltonianHSL, which can be arbitrary
in this case).
For this architecture, since the decay step is performed
outside the device, in principle there is no constraint on
the values of the learning rate or the particular form of
dissipation. In this case, the learning rate can be tuned
to maximize the speed of training. Just like in the case
of training of artiﬁcial neural networks, the learning rate
cannot be too high: otherwise, a gradient descent step is
not guaranteed to decrease the value of the cost function.
Learning ﬁeld localized inside the nonlinear
core – The second possibility, illustrated in ﬁgure 4(b),
is that the evolution ofΘ happens entirely inside the de-
vice. For example, this would be the case if the learning
dynamical variables are given by optical ﬁelds conﬁned
in cavities placed inside the self-learning device, or are
stored inside some other persistent degrees of freedom.
In that case, there is the danger that during the decay
step the dynamics of prescribed by HSL would induce
some unwanted drift of the learning ﬁeld. To avoid this,
we need to require that the dynamics induced byHSL re-
sults in a continuously degenerate ground state manifold
for Θ. Therefore, when the learning dynamical variables
are conﬁned inside the device, the form ofHθ is con-
strained. In appendix G we outline some possibilities to
engineer such a Hamiltonian with a few simple nonlinear
interactions. Nevertheless, we can still have arbitrary
Hamiltonians for Ψ and for the interaction between Ψ
and Θ, as long as during the decay stepΨ = 0 inside
the device. This will be true if we think ofΨ as some
sort of excitation (wave packet) having left the device by
this time. Although this restricts the form ofHSL, it has
the advantage that it is no longer necessary to keep per-
forming time-reversals once the training is ﬁnished and
as long no evaluation passes are performed.
Overall, what our training procedure (in either of the
two cases) does is to impart an additional eﬀective force
on Θ proportional to the gradient of the cost function,
as we will explain in the next section. This breaks the
degeneracy in such a way that the only surviving stable
ﬁxed points are the minima of the cost function.
Up to now we have always considered the evaluation
ﬁeldΨ to adopt the shape of wave packets traveling
through the device. However, even there, other possibili-
ties exist: one could adopt a scenario where time-reversal
of Ψ is implemented entirely inside the device. In that
case, we do not need to think of propagation along a
particular direction, nor an architecture reminiscent of
the structure of layered neural networks. Rather, the
dynamics ofΨ could resemble that of a wave-chaotic sys-
tem inside a complex nonlinear cavity (see example in
appendix D).
a b
input
evolution 
(forward pass)
inject error signal
evolution 
(backward pass)
learning ﬁeld 
dissipation
time reversal
time
time reversal
ψ θ
πθ
c 
d
θ
echo
decayfw. 
pass
-T 0 T 2T -T 0 T 2T
tt
Figure 5. Ingredients of a self-learning machine based
on Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation. (a) Sequence
of events. (b) Use of ’pseudo-dissipation via ancillary modes’.
The learning ﬁeldΨ is here decomposed into a number of
discrete modes. As time progresses, more and more modes
do not participate any longer in the physical interaction (yel-
low boxes), becoming ancillary modes. Both these ancillary
modes and the learning ﬁeldθ also take part in time-reversal,
however. (c) Time-evolution of the learning ﬁeld momentum
(left) and the ﬁeld itself (right) during one forward-backward
pass, including the eﬀects of time-reversal (we show a single
value of the ﬁeld at one location). The momentum decays
back to zero, but the ﬁeld has been updated suitably. (d)
The intrinsic dynamics of the learning ﬁeld during the decay
step has a continuously degenerate ground state (i.e. a mani-
fold attractor). Right: The eﬀect of the training dynamics is
to break this degeneracy and produce a minimum determined
by the cost function.
E. Summarizing the general scheme of
Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation
We are now in a position to summarize the general
approach (Fig. 5). The HEB procedure consists of a
sequence of multiple events (Fig. 5a), but they can be
subdivided into two big steps:
1. Echo step. We randomly draw an input sample
from the training data set, and we use it to in-
ject Ψ(−T ). Following the nonlinear dynamics

===== PAGE 12 =====
12
of the interacting system, the output is obtained
at t = 0 . At that point, the evaluation ﬁeld is
weakly perturbed according to Ψ(0) → Ψ(0)−
iϵ∂Ψ∗(0)C, which can be brought about via the
dynamics induced by an extra interaction Hamil-
tonian (the "cost function Hamiltonian"), as ex-
plained above. Immediately afterwards, both Ψ
and also the learning ﬁeldΘ are time-reversed (i.e.
phase-conjugated). At t = T, a perturbed echo of
the initial conﬁguration will be obtained. We then
time-reverse Θ again at t = T. The ﬁnal result
of this whole process is equivalent to the following
update of the learning ﬁeld:
Θ(T ) = Θ(−T )−iϵ∂Θ∗(−T)C. (8)
To be clear,C here always is the sample-speciﬁc
cost function. We show in detail how to prove this
result in general in the next section. It has a simple
interpretation: to ﬁrst order inϵ, the evolution of
Θ satisﬁes Hamilton’s equations, with an eﬀective
Hamiltonian equal to the cost function.
2. Decay step. The dissipation is switched on for a
time intervalTD. The evolution ofΘ is determined
by HSL,decay. This will ensure the suitable update
of the Θ ﬁeld needed to implement SGD via the
physical procedure explained above. Finally, pro-
ceed with the next training sample.
The evolution of the learning ﬁeld during the whole
procedure is schematically depicted in Fig. 5c. Imag-
ine that these two steps are alternated many times, with
suitable small values forϵ andTD. Then the average dy-
namics of Θ is approximately described by an eﬀective
Hamiltonian given by
Hθ,eﬀ = 1
ϵ +TD
(ϵC +TDH′
θ) , (9)
where C here represents the sample-averaged cost func-
tion, andH′
θ depends on the scenario we are considering.
For case I (time-reversal of Θ outside the device), we
simply have H′
θ = Hθ,decay. For case II (time-reversal
inside), we haveH′
θ = Hθ +Hθ,decay. Remember that
by our assumptions in both cases the phase space associ-
ated toH′
θ has a continuous degenerate stable manifold.
Consider what happens in the low-temperature limit of
the thermal dissipative reservoir that is used to act onΘ.
When we setϵ >0, we break the degeneracy ofH′
θ (see
Fig. 5d). The dynamical process we described will tend
to equilibrate the temperatures ofΘ and the reservoir,
so that Θ will tend to minimize the cost function, con-
strained to the manifold of ground states ofH′
θ. Once
the training has converged, we can stop perform train-
ing steps (in terms of the eﬀective Hamiltonian, that is
equivalent to settingϵ = 0). Since we have converged
to one of the many stable states,Θ will remain near the
learned conﬁguration for arbitrarily long times. That is
of course important to ensure that, after training is com-
pleted, the SL machine doesn’t quickly forget the result
of the learning process. This line of reasoning does not
depend on the particularities ofH′
θ, as long as the phase
space possesses some stable manifold.
This concludes our overview. The steps of the ap-
proach are illustrated in Fig. 6 in terms of a very simple
mechanical Hamiltonian system, highlighting the gener-
ality of the procedure.
time reversal
& inject error signal
/uni03A8
/uni0398
+
+
completed 
learning update
forward pass
backward pass &
a b c
Figure 6. Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation in
a simple mechanical model. (a) A charged ball Ψ is
launched with a velocity representing the input to the ma-
chine. Its trajectory is deﬂected depending on the position
of another charged ballΘ, which can freely move along a rail
and which experiences a momentum kick due to this interac-
tion. (b) Eventually, the velocities of both balls are reversed,
and the ballΨ is slightly adjusted according to its deviation
from the desired outcome ("error signal"). (c) Afterwards, it
retraces almost exactly its initial trajectory, delivering yet an-
other momentum kick to theΘ particle. Finally, any remain-
ing velocity ofΘ is dissipated and converted into a ﬁnite dis-
placement, representing the training update. Of course, the
expressive power of this machine, containing only these two
degrees of freedom, is very limited (i.e. it can only produce
very rough approximations to most input-output relations).
Nevertheless, it illustrates the generality of the procedure –
e.g. an arbitrary (even unknown) static force ﬁeld acting on
the Ψ particle will not spoil the learning procedure.
We now present a few additional considerations.
Consider now what happens when the set of stable
ground states of H′
θ is in fact not continuous, but ac-
tually discrete. This may be the case if, for example,
Θ describes a collection of degenerate parametric oscilla-
tors. In this situation, a gradient descent strategy would
not succeed, as Θ cannot change continuously between
ﬁxed points. Nevertheless, our procedure for training
can still minimize the cost function. Indeed, consider
that we start from a relatively high temperature in the
thermal reservoir. The thermal ﬂuctuations in the reser-
voir would result in random jumps between the stable
points. As our training procedure advances, we decrease
the temperature of the reservoir, inducing annealing. In
the end, if the system converges to a thermal equilib-
rium, the conﬁguration ofΘ would be found in one of
the minima of the cost function.
In practice, controllable dissipation may be a too strin-
gent requirement. Actually, we do not need to have con-
trol over the dissipation onΘ if the dissipation timescale
is large enough. In order to see this, we require that

===== PAGE 13 =====
13
the damping constant is weak enough that its eﬀect can
be neglected during one single evaluation step: i.e. the
damping time-scale Γ−1 is much longer than the dura-
tion of the evaluation stepT. The core of our procedure
is to enact an eﬀective force onθ that is proportional
to the slope of the cost function. If the dynamics were
purely conservative, that would not be suﬃcient, asΘ
would oscillate around the stable manifold without ever
converging anywhere. It is clear then that we need such a
damping term. In consequence, we distinguish two time
scales: the short time scaleT of an evaluation step, in
which all dynamics is approximately Hamiltonian and
time-reversible, and the long time scale of the total train-
ing time, in which dissipation ensures that, in the end,
Θ converges to the stable manifold.
F. Invertible Dynamics vs. Contractive Maps
Before going any further, it is useful to introduce the
concept of pseudo-dissipation via ancillary modes. The
goal of supervised learning (both for classiﬁcation and re-
gression) is often to approximate a map from a set of high
dimensional input vectors to a lower dimensional space.
This is an inherently contractive process. Nevertheless,
the fact that our theory of SL machines is based on re-
versible dynamics during the evaluation (forward pass)
does not imply that it cannot be used for this purpose.
It is always possible to embed contractive maps inside
a higher-dimensional reversible map. In physical terms,
we can introduce pseudo-dissipation via ancillary modes:
by introducing additional ancillary dynamical variables
(which will also be considered part ofΨ in our formal-
ism), we can simulate the eﬀect of dissipation (Fig. 5b).
Wecallitpseudo-dissipationviaancillarymodesbecause,
unlike for real dissipation, we can still time-reverse the
whole system, including the ancillary modes.
Aside from its use to learn contractive maps, there is a
further reason to include pseudo-dissipation via ancillary
modes in SL machines. In order to be expressive, a SL
machine must have a very complex nonlinear dynamics.
However, it seems advisable to avoid the strong sensi-
tivity on the input that is implied by chaotic dynamics.
When adding dissipation to a conservative chaotic sys-
tem, it is known that this reduces the sensitivity to initial
conditions. In the case of driven systems, where asymp-
totic Lyapunov exponents can be deﬁned, increasing dis-
sipation leads to an overall shift of Lyapunov exponents
to smaller values, thus stabilizing the system [38]. In the
case of undriven systems, stronger dissipation enhances
the rate for leaving transient chaotic dynamics and set-
tling into ﬁxed points [39]. In our numerical experiments
(reported later in VII), we considered a photonic convo-
lutional neural network with pseudo-dissipation. We ﬁnd
that, consistent with these general observations, adding
pseudo-dissipation helps to reduce the sensitivity to ini-
tial conditions and improves the performance of the self-
learning machine.
Nevertheless, we shall remark that pseudo-contractive
dynamics is not a requirement for HEB, as it can
also train devices without such a property. Pseudo-
contractive dynamics is only a desirable property in some
interesting applications of a self-learning machine. How-
ever, there are other applications in which it is actually
beneﬁcial to have a reversible input-output relation for
the relevant degrees of freedom, and hence no pseudo-
contractive dynamics is required. For example, reversible
residual networks have been recently found useful in im-
age classiﬁcation tasks [40–42].
To avoid confusion, we emphasize that this conceptual
split ofΨ into the original evaluation ﬁeld and additional
ancillary degrees of freedom is irrelevant with respect to
the following analysis of the echo step. Therefore, to
simplify the notation we just consider the full vectorΨ
without specifying how or whether it is split.
V. ANALYSIS OF THE ECHO STEP
Wenowprovemoreformallythatthecrucialingredient
of our scheme, the echo step, indeed works as advertised
above, deriving equation (8) in the most general setting.
Inordertosimplifythenotation, wedeﬁne Φ :=
(
Ψ
Θ
)
as the joint conﬁguration of all dynamical variables of
the system. The dynamics ofΦ is given by the following
equation of motion
i ˙Φ =∇Φ∗H, (10)
where H[Φ] is the Hamiltonian. Crucially, we assumeH
tobetime-reversal-invariant, whichmeans H[Φ] =H[Φ∗]
in this notation. Let us remark here that time-reversal-
invariance is the only assumption in this section (we do
not need to assume a degenerate ground state for the
expressions derived in this section). The operator∇Φ∗
involves the derivatives∂/∂Φ∗
i and is formally deﬁned
as (∇Φ∗f)i = ∂f/∂ Φ∗
i. We stress that we will, at the
moment, study the dynamics purely in the absence of
coupling to the dissipative reservoir. In the notation of
Eq. (1),H[Φ] corresponds to the ﬁrst three terms of the
SL Hamiltonian,H =Hψ +Hint +Hθ, without the bath.
A. Expression for the gradient of the cost function
in terms of an ’advanced’ backpropagating
perturbation
In a SL machine, the output of an evaluation step is a
function of the inputΨ(−T )and the learning ﬁeld, whose
conﬁguration at the initial time is given byΘ(−T ). In
the following, we want to obtain a formal expression for
the gradient ofC with respect toΘ(−T ), which will later
form the basis for physical backpropagation. SinceΨ and
Θ are treated on an equal footing in Eq. (10), we will set

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
out to ﬁnd the gradient ofC with respect to the initial
value of the joint stateΦ(−T ):
(
∇Φ∗(−T)C
∇Φ(−T)C
)
=D
(
∇Φ∗(0)C
∇Φ(0)C
)
, (11)
where the matrixD is deﬁned as
D :=
(
∇Φ∗(−T)⊗ Φ∗(0) ∇Φ∗(−T)⊗ Φ(0)
∇Φ(−T)⊗ Φ∗(0) ∇Φ(−T)⊗ Φ(0)
)
(12)
and [a⊗b]ij =aibj. Here the operatorD obviously maps
back changes in the output to corresponding changes in
the input, and we will now relate it to the Green’s func-
tion of the problem.
Suppose that Φ(t) is the solution of the nonlinear
Hamiltonian equations when the initial conditions are
given by Φ(−T ). Let us consider what happens if we
perturb Φ(−T ) by some smallδΦ(−T ). This results in
a weak perturbation δΦ(t) traveling forward on top of
the zero-th order solution. One can writeδΦ(t) as the
solution to the linearized equations of motion:
LΦ(t)
(
δΦ(t)
δΦ∗(t)
)
=δ(t +T )
(
−iδΦ(−T )
iδΦ∗(−T )
)
. (13)
Here we introduced the linear diﬀerential operator
LΦ(t) =i
(
+1
−1
) d
dt−
(
∇Φ⊗∇ Φ∗ ∇Φ∗⊗∇ Φ∗
∇Φ⊗∇ Φ ∇Φ∗⊗∇ Φ
)
H[Φ(t)]
in compact notation, with [∇Φ⊗∇ Φ∗]ij = ∂2
∂Φi∂Φ∗
j
and
so on. If the vectorΦ has M components, the operator
LΦ(t) acts on a space of dimension2M. The inhomoge-
neous term on the right-hand side of the preceding equa-
tion is there to enforce the initial conditions, assuming
that δΦ = 0 for t→−∞ .
The solution of Eq. (13) can be written in terms of the
retarded Green’s function associated toLΦ[t]:
(
δΦ(t)
δΦ∗(t)
)
=GΦ(t,−T )
(
iδΦ(−T )
−iδΦ∗(−T )
)
. (14)
The Green’s functionGΦ(t,−T ) is a linear operator such
that
LΦ(t′)GΦ(t′,t ) =δ (t′−t) I, (15)
where I is the identity matrix of size2M. Note that both
LΦ andGΦ(t,−T ) depend on the zero-th order solution
Φ(t) of the nonlinear dynamical equations, around which
we have linearized. We chose GΦ(t,−T ) to be the re-
tarded Green’s function, meaning thatδΦ(t) originates
at t =−T and propagates in the forward direction of
time. Causality dictates thatGΦ(t′,t ) = 0 for t′ <t .
We now connect the matrixD to the Green’s function.
From the deﬁnition ofD in Eq. (12), we see it measures
the change at timet = 0when introducing a small change
at timet =−T. The same relation is expressed by the
Green’s function, as deﬁned in Eq. (15), except for some
constant factors. Merging both equations, we see that
GΦ(0,−T ) =−D†iσz, (16)
where σz is the Pauli matrix. Therefore, we haveD =
−iσzGΦ(0,−T )†, and we can now express the change of
the cost function in terms of the Green’s function. How-
ever, we will see presently that it is helpful in terms of
physicalinterpretationtointroducethe advancedGreen’s
function for this purpose, which also obeys Eq. (15) but
hasGadv(t′,t ) = 0 fort′ >t and represents a signal going
backward in time. It is related to the retarded Green’s
function via
G†
Φ(t′,t ) =Gadv
Φ (t,t′). (17)
Combining Eqs. (17), (16) and (11), we ﬁnally obtain a
formula relating the gradient ofC that is required for the
learningupdatetotheadvancedGreen’sfunctionandthe
(easily obtained) gradient of C with respect to the output
ﬁelds:
(
∇Φ∗(−T)C
∇Φ(−T)C
)
=−iσzGadv
Φ (−T, 0)
(
∇Φ∗(0)C
∇Φ(0)C
)
. (18)
This is still a formal expression at this point, but in the
next section we will show how it can be implemented
physically.
B. Time reversal of the perturbation: physical
backpropagation
How can we produce the signal of Eq. (18) in practice,
in order to allow the training update to take place? Ap-
parently, we need to inject the source term∇Φ∗(0)C as a
perturbation and follow its "backwards time evolution".
Let us consider that, att = 0, we have obtained the
output Φout. Suppose that we have a way to implement
an interaction HamiltonianC[Φ] that is proportional to
the cost function (written as a function of the output).
Let us further suppose that we can control this inter-
action Hamiltonian, so that we can switch it on during
someshortperiodoftime, andlaterswitchitoﬀagain. In
theory this is always possible, because a cost function is
just a real function of the output. In practice, we will see
that, depending on the cost function, this corresponds to
driving the system, or applying phase shifts, or, for more
complicated cost functions, to realizing some nonlinear
interactions. In any case, this operation is a function
only of the output, not requiring any knowledge of or
feedback on the internal degrees of freedom of the au-
tonomous self-learning machine. As we will discuss later,
a practical implementation is possible for several stan-
dard cost functions with relatively simple setups. For
the moment, we consider the general case in whichC is

===== PAGE 15 =====
15
an arbitrary cost function. When we realize such an in-
teraction HamiltonianC, according to Hamilton’s equa-
tions, the evolution will be given byi ˙Φ =∇Φ∗C. Let us
suppose that we only realize such interactions during an
inﬁnitesimally small time interval,ϵ. The result of such
a brief Hamiltonian evolution is to update the ﬁelds as
Φ(0)↦→ Φ(0)−iϵ∇Φ∗C.
The advanced Green’s function evolves a perturbation
oftheoutputbackwardsintimetoobtainthecorrespond-
ing perturbation of the input. In order to realize this
physically, we need to induce the time-reversed evolu-
tion of the system. In a time-reversal invariant system
(such as the one considered here), this is possible by im-
plementing a time-reversal operation and then letting the
naturaldynamicsproceedfromthereforwardsintime. In
the present complex notation, we know that a time rever-
sal is equivalent to phase conjugation,Φ↦→ Φ∗, ﬂipping
the momenta. By means of phase conjugation, applied
to the already perturbed ﬁeld, we produce a perturbed
echo given byΦ∗(0) +iϵ∇ΦC≡ Φecho(0) +δΦecho(0).
Importantly, the whole conﬁguration of the system is
time-reversed, and, as a consequence, the evolution for
t∈ [0,T ] is, to leading order, given by the fully time-
reversed nonlinear evolution: Φecho(t) = Φ ∗(−t). The
ﬁrst order correctionδΦecho(t) is the linear response of
the system to the perturbationiϵ∇ΦC in the initial con-
ditions, evolving on top ofΦ∗(−t).
Now we come to the crucial step. In any time-reversal
invariant system, the advanced and retarded Green’s
functions of linear perturbations propagating on top of
the original nonlinear dynamics and its time-reversed
counterpart, respectively, are connected in the following
way:
Gadv
Φ (t′,t ) =TG ret
Φecho(−t′,−t)T , (19)
whereT =σx is the time-reversal operation, interchang-
ing δΦ and δΦ∗. Therefore:
Gadv
Φ (−T, 0)
(
∇Φ∗(0)C
∇Φ(0)C
)
=TG ret
Φecho(T, 0)
(
∇Φ(0)C
∇Φ∗(0)C
)
(20)
It is now obvious that the left-hand-side, which (as we
have already found above) formally yields the update
needed for the gradient descent, can bephysically im-
plemented in terms of the right-hand-side version, with
a suitable perturbation injected and propagatedforward
in time on top of the echo. Finally, as we can see from
Eq.(20), att =T wehavetoperformaﬁnaltime-reversal
(phase-conjugation) again.
Overall, after the whole process is completed, we ob-
tain a replica of the initial conﬁguration att =−T, but
importantly with a small correction that is proportional
to ϵ. The result of the whole physical process can be
summarized as(
Φ(T )
Φ∗(T )
)
=
(
Φ(−T )
Φ∗(−T )
)
−TG ret
Φecho(T, 0)
(
ϵ∇Φ(0)C
ϵ∇Φ∗(0)C
)
.
(21)
Wecanconvinceourselvesthatthisisthelearningupdate
that was needed, by reformulating the deviation (second
term on the right-hand-side) with the help of Eq. (20)
and subsequently Eq. (18)]. This produces:
Φ(T )− Φ(−T ) =−iϵ∇Φ∗(−T)C (22)
This is exactly the learning update that was needed, ac-
cording to Eq. (8), for the learning parametersΘ. Inci-
dentally, the evaluation degrees of freedomΨ have also
changed, but they will be discarded when the next input
is injected into the learning machine.
VI. MAIN INGREDIENTS OF
IMPLEMENTATIONS
The most important feature of our new method is its
generality. It can be used to train any time-reversible
Hamiltonian physical system. It is not our intention here
to give a full description of all possible implementations
of the SL machine. On this general level, we cannot even
decide which ones are optimal, as the most suitable archi-
tecture is heavily dependent on the machine learning task
of interest. Nevertheless, we can give some guidelines.
The main ingredients of any SL machine of the type
presented here are: a time-reversal-invariant Hamilto-
nian system with two sets of dynamical variablesΨ and
Θ; a device that can time-reverse Ψ and Θ, and a de-
vice or method to transform the output according to the
cost function Hamiltonian (injecting the error signal). In
this section, we will discuss each of these ingredients on
a general level, and we will provide a summary of some
of the most promising possibilities for their realization.
A. The nonlinear core
As emphasized above, HEB can work with an arbi-
trary, completely unrestricted Hamiltonian, as long as
time-reversal invariance is maintained.
Any actual implementation will typically be based on
local interactions between the degrees of freedom. Since
for practical applications it is desirable to have designs
that are scalable, a SL device in practice should be con-
structed by a combination of simple elements. We can
think for example of integrated photonics or supercon-
ducting circuits.
The details of particular experimental platforms will
be discussed later, in section VIII. Here, we brieﬂy list
some general guidelines. In order to attain a nonlinear
input-output relation that is expressive and useful for
machine learning, we need that (1) many degrees of free-
dom interact during the forward pass and (2) there are
nonlinear interactions whose eﬀect is strong during such
a pass. A common question in this regard would be the
eﬀect of chaos. Chaotic dynamics is deﬁned as a prop-
erty of the long-time limit, while here we are considering

===== PAGE 16 =====
16
a ﬁnite evolution time for the forward pass. In practice,
as we will see in the numerical examples, this is a matter
of degree: it is useful to have suﬃciently strong nonlinear
eﬀects, but not become too sensitive to small deviations
in initial conditions.
A device combining linear local couplings and local
nonlinearities is enough to produce extremely rich dy-
namics. For example, in optics one can use a combination
of beam splitters and nonlinear layers to reproduce the
architecture of a feedforward neural network [17]. How-
ever, there is no reason a priori to restrict to such a lay-
out: Nonlinear wave ﬁelds interacting with each other
inside some extended medium do not possess any obvi-
ous layered structure, but are still compatible with HEB,
just like arbitrary lattices of coupled degrees of freedom.
One important requirement for HEB, is, of course,
a time-reversal-invariant Hamiltonian. Practically, this
means that dissipation in the course of the forward pass
must be as low as possible. That already rules out some
physical devices where a strong attenuation is unavoid-
able (e.g. when nonlinearities are based on absorption
of waves). Nevertheless, even for promising platforms,
such as coherent nonlinear optics, there is some remain-
ing level of dissipation. In the limit of large scale net-
works, even a small amount of attenuation could be prob-
lematic, since its eﬀect increases linearly with the propa-
gation length. However, since we are considering classical
devices, there is in principle no obstacle to employ am-
pliﬁcation in order to compensate for the loss present in
the device (we discuss the aspect of dissipation further
when assessing concrete experimental platforms).
B. The time-reversal operation
The second key ingredient of HEB is the ability to
perform a time-reversal operation after the forward pass.
Such an operation does not represent purely Hamiltonian
evolution, i.e. it does not preserve the Poisson brackets
of coordinates and momenta. In practice, this means the
operation necessarily requires dissipation. As opposed
to the case of quantum mechanics, in classical systems
this requirement poses no fundamental obstacle. How-
ever, a physical and fast implementation is not necessar-
ily straightforward in all classical systems. Fortunately, a
well-known solution in the case of nonlinear optics [43] is
phase conjugation (for a review of this extended ﬁeld, see
[44]). Itisbynowwellestablishedthatphaseconjugation
is not particular to optics. In fact, it can be engineered
in any wave ﬁeld where one can realize three- or four-
wave mixing. For example, it has been demonstrated
with acoustic waves [45], matter waves [46], microwaves
[47], and spin waves [48].
The fact that phase conjugation can be used to time-
reverse wave pulses has long been understood (see e.g.
[49] for the optical domain, and [50] for atomic matter
waves). The reversal of time evolution has been demon-
strated in several nonlinear systems, including nonlinear
optics[51,52], electromagneticwave-chaoticsystems[53],
and water waves [54].
Moreover, in systems where phase conjugation is not
straightforward to achieve physically, it is often pos-
sible to measure the output and inject back a phase-
conjugated replica. We note that this would replace one
part of the HEB procedure by external processing and
feedback, but the overall scheme could still be advanta-
geous, since we still beneﬁt from physical backpropaga-
tion and physical parameter update. This last possibil-
ity is know as digital phase conjugation, and it has been
demonstrated with remarkable success in optical setups
[55], using electro-optic components.
Although the concepts of implementations of phase
conjugation are well-established, it may be helpful to re-
call the principle here. From a mathematical point of
view, for any time-reversible Hamiltonian, the evolution
can be reversed by inverting the momenta: π → −π.
In our complex notation, that means to perform a phase
conjugation of the ﬁelds: Φ → Φ∗. As we remarked
above, this step cannot be realized with purely Hamilto-
nian evolution, not even by breaking time-reversal sym-
metry momentarily. A time-reversal operation does not
preserve the Poisson brackets, so it is not a canonical
transformation. However, one can circumvent this prob-
lem by using ancillary modes.
For simplicity, we will now discuss a situation with
discrete coupled modes of the wave ﬁeld, the extension
to extended waves is straightforward. Let us assume that
we have a dynamical variableΦ that we want to phase-
conjugate. Additionally, we also have a second, ancillary
dynamical variableΞ. An important assumption is that
the initial value of the ancilla isΞin = 0. The phase
conjugation can then be realized in three steps. First, we
couple Φ and Ξ in such a way that, after a ﬁxed time,
we have that Ξ = Φ∗
in. This step can be realized with
Hamiltonian dynamics. For example, a Hamiltonian of
the "parametric interaction" formH = χ (ΦΞ + Φ∗Ξ∗)
would result in the desired outcome after an interaction
timet =χ−1 log
(
1 +
√
2
)
. Second, we swap both modes,
so that Φ = Φ ∗
in. This step can also be the result of
Hamiltonian evolution, now choosing a "beam splitter
Hamiltonian", H =χ (ΦΞ∗ + Φ∗Ξ). Third, we erase the
state of the ancilla (this is where dissipation enters), so
that Ξ = 0 again.
C. Implementation of the decay step
A third ingredient of our scheme is the ability to trans-
form the physically backpropagated perturbation into an
update of the learning degrees of freedom. More specif-
ically, the goal of the decay step is to shift the learning
degrees of freedom according to the momenta (which in
turn are proportional to the gradient of the cost func-
tion), andatthesametimedissipate(only)themomenta.
Mathematically, we want to produce the following trans-

===== PAGE 17 =====
17
formation
θ′ =θ−η∇θC, (23)
π′
θ = 0, (24)
where θ′ and π′
θ are the learning ﬁeld quadratures after
the decay step, andη is the learning rate.
Importantly, this operation can be implemented by
means of a sequence of three elementary transformations.
Since all the most promising platforms we conceive are
based on waveﬁelds, we provide here an outline of its im-
plementationforawaveﬁeldmoderepresentingalearning
degree of freedom.
The transformation given by equation (23) can be ap-
proximated by a succession of three elementary steps. In
the ﬁrst step, we coupleθ and πθ by means of a phase
shift. In the second step, Θ undergoes parametric am-
pliﬁcation, a routine transformation in nonlinear optics
and wave platforms in general. Finally, there is a step
of attenuation. The overall transformation as a result of
these three steps is given by
θ′ =
√
AG (cos(ϕ)θ + sin(ϕ)πθ), (25)
π′
θ =
√
A
G (cos(ϕ)πθ− sin(ϕ)θ), (26)
whereϕ is the phase shift angle,G is the parametric gain
and A is the attenuation.
If we set
√
A/G ≪ 1, we have πθ ≈ 0. We need
to compensate for the attenuation of θ by tuning the
parametric ampliﬁcation. By choosingcos(ϕ)
√
AG = 1,
we attain the desired transformation given by equation
(23). Sinceπθ =−ϵ∇θC, the learning rate is then given
by η = ϵ tan(ϕ). Note that the learning rate can be
controlled by tuning the phase shiftϕ (and tuning the
parametric gain accordingly). Importantly, the learning
rate can be controlled independently of the sizeϵ of the
injected error signal, since we always have the free pa-
rameter ϕ available. This is useful, since the values ofϵ
should be neither too large (breakdown of the lineariza-
tion approximation for the backpropagated error signal)
nor too small (negative impact of extra noise).
This is not the only possible practical implementation
of the decay step. Observe that the desired transfor-
mation can also be written in complex form as Θ′ =
(exp−iϕ Θ + expiϕ Θ∗)/2 cos(ϕ) (a straightforward calcu-
lation shows that the learning rate is againη = tan(ϕ)ϵ).
It follows immediately that the decay step can be real-
ized by a combination of linear unitary operations (i.e.
beam-splitters), phase conjugation and phase-insensitive
ampliﬁcation.
Alternatively, observe that the transformation given
by equation (23) could be also obtained as the evolution
of a mechanical degree of freedomθ with ballistic prop-
agation under the inﬂuence of friction. In this case, the
initial momentumπθ is translated to a shift inθ (propor-
tional to the inverse of the mass), while the momentum
is dissipated in the long-term limit as a result of the fric-
tion. Therefore, the decay step is straightforward to im-
plement in the case of mechanical degrees of freedom (the
problem with mechanical implementations is that there
is no straightforward method to realize the time-reversal
operation, unless by measurement and feedback).
D. The learning signal
The cost function is the fourth essential ingredient in
the design of a SL machine. In our prescription for HEB,
onecrucialstepistoinjectthelearningsignalbyperturb-
ing the output ﬁelds according toΨ(0)−iϵ∇Φ∗C, where
C is a Hamiltonian that is proportional to the cost func-
tion. For arbitrary cost functions, this could always be
achieved via some external processing and feedback, but
as a general rule of course we want to avoid such steps.
For simple cost functions, it could be possible to engineer
a physical system whose evolution is actually described
by the cost function HamiltonianC.
In the particularly important case of the Mean Square
Error (MSE) cost function, a physical implementation
is relatively easy. The MSE cost function is deﬁned as
the squared diﬀerence between the actual output and the
target output:
C[Ψ(0)] =
∫
dxg (x)|Ψ(x, 0)− Ψtarget(x)|2. (27)
Here g(x) is a position-dependent weighting factor and
will be zero in the areas that correspond to the ancil-
lary degrees of freedom (which will be time-reversed,
but not compared against any target). Expanding the
square, we can write the corresponding Hamiltonian as
C[Ψ(0)] = g(x)|Ψ(0)|2− 2g(x)Re
{
Ψ(0)Ψ∗
target
}
(where
we have dropped|Ψtarget|2, which is just an irrelevant
constant term). In terms of a physical wave ﬁeld, the
ﬁrst term,g|Ψ(0)|2, is just a shift in the frequency of the
ﬁeld. Its eﬀect onΨ(0) is to induce a phase shift given by
e−iϵg(x). The only reason we do not completely neglect
this phase shift is thatg(x) may be spatially inhomoge-
neous. The second term,−2gRe
{
Ψ(0)Ψ∗
target
}
, is noth-
ingbutadriveproportionaltothetarget. Inotherwords,
this term can be realized straightforwardly by injecting
a weak copy of the target ﬁeld distribution, adding it to
the wave ﬁeldΨ, and realizing the corresponding phase
shift set byg(x).
Alternatively, the MSE cost function can also be re-
alized using the intensity of the ﬁeld. Now, instead
of forcing Ψ(0) to match a target ﬁeld, we only try
to match a target intensity distribution. In that case,
the cost function Hamiltonian is given by C[Ψ(0)] =
g|Ψ(0)|4−2g|Ψ(0)|2Itarget. In that case, the experimen-
tal realization ofC[Ψ(0)] is reduced to a homogeneous
Kerr nonlinearity combined with a phase mask propor-
tional to the target intensity pattern.
Other cost functions may be realized with diﬀerent in-
teractions. Which one is optimal would depend on the
problem at hand and how the output is encoded in the
physical ﬁelds. In many cases, the choice of the cost
function would not be a critical feature.

===== PAGE 18 =====
18
With regard to the amplitudeϵ of the injected pertur-
bation ("error signal"), on the one hand it has to be small
enough so that the weak perturbation is approximately
in the linear regime. On the other hand, in a noisy de-
vice it is beneﬁcial to have a larger amplitude, in order
to overcome the eﬀect of noise. Therefore, it is advisable
to choose the amplitude of the perturbation as large as
possible while remaining in the linearized regime. Once
ϵ is chosen, the learning rate is not yet ﬁxed: It can be
controlled by changing the free parameters in the decay
step. When the decay step and the error signal injection
are performed outside the nonlinear core, there is in prin-
ciple no restriction placed on those free parameters, and
hence the learning rate can be tuned at will.
VII. ILLUSTRATION IN NUMERICAL
EXPERIMENTS
In this section we illustrate Hamiltonian Echo Back-
propagation in two speciﬁc examples, by means of nu-
merical simulations (our simulations were performed us-
ing python and numpy). Both examples rely on nonlin-
ear wave propagation, of the kind that might be imple-
mented in photonic neural networks. In the ﬁrst case,
we consider a self-learning machine with a very simple
setup and we train to learn a logical function. In the
second example, we consider a more elaborate architec-
ture inspired by convolutional neural networks. We train
the self-learning machine to perform classiﬁcation on the
standard MNIST handwritten digits data set. We believe
that a more sophisticated architecture or other choices
of the activation function and the cost function, together
with a careful tuning of the hypeparameters, could im-
prove the results even further beyond the validation accu-
racy of 97.5% observed here. However, our primary goal
here is to illustrate the concept, rather than construct-
ing the optimal setup. In both scenarios, we simulated
the full Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation procedure,
involving both the forward and the backward pass.
The setup considered in the ﬁrst example consists of
a nonlinear wave ﬁeld. The dynamics of the evaluation
ﬁeldΨ is given by the nonlinear Schrödinger equation
coupled to the learning ﬁeld
i ˙Ψ = β
2∇2Ψ +
(
χθ +g|Ψ|2)
Ψ. (28)
The learning ﬁeldΘ permeates the nonlinear medium
and it interacts with the evaluation ﬁeld through an in-
teraction of theχ(2) type. This could be implemented
in a nonlinear optical setup, or alternatively in a device
based on matter waves. The evaluation ﬁeld is initially
prepared in a superposition of wave-packets that encode
the input (Fig. 7), with initial momentumkz > 0. Thus,
they propagate from left to right, accumulating the eﬀect
of the nonlinear self-interaction and the interaction with
the learning ﬁeld. The output intensity is measured at
two points,xout
0 , xout
1 . The output is considered a logical
0 if|Ψ(xout
0 , 0)|>|Ψ(xout
1 , 0)|; otherwise, it is a logical1
(for more details, see Appendix A). The goal is to learn
the exclusive-or (XOR) function mapping from input to
output. As can be seen in Fig. 7, this is achieved rapidly.
The setup that we consider for the second example is
inspired by the photonic neural network introduced the-
oretically by Ong et al [56]. We train this device to learn
MNIST handwritten digits classiﬁcation. It is composed
of three convolutional layers followed by a dense fully-
connected layer. The nonlinearity is provided by aχ(2)
optical nonlinearity, as described in Eq. (32). The convo-
lutional layers can be implemented by a combination of
Discrete Fourier Transforms (DFTs) and learnable phase
shifts. The proposal by Ong et al. did not address the
problem of how to implement the dense layers; we intro-
duce an implementation of the dense layers that is based
on a sequence of DFTs, learnable phase shifts and a lin-
ear interaction with ancillary degrees of freedom (see Ap-
pendix B). As a cost function, we choose the mean square
error on the intensity.
In this setup, the learning parameters are all in the
form of phase shifts. We assume that these phase shifts
are produced by an interaction of the typeHint =θΨ∗Ψ
inside some optical cavities through which the evaluation
wave ﬁeld travels.
In our simulations, the best results were obtained by
choosing values of the nonlinear coupling strength that
are diﬀerent in the convolutional and the dense layers.
This can be explained by the fact that the intensity de-
cays as the wave packets propagate, as a result of the in-
teraction with the ancilla modes. Therefore, it is optimal
to choose that the nonlinearity in the dense layer,χ2, is
strongerthanthenonlinearityintheconvolutionallayers,
χ1. The results in ﬁgure 7 show the training progress for
several values ofχ1 andχ2. First we show the linear case,
whenχ1 =χ2 = 0, and then we sweep across several val-
ues ofχ2, with ﬁxedχ1. One can see a sharp transition
in the achievable accuracy whenχ2 is increased. When
the nonlinearity surpasses some threshold (χ2≈ 3), the
accuracy jumps from around 90% to above 95% (Fig.7g).
This result suggests that at this point the device gains a
signiﬁcantly better expressivity. Our observations are in
qualitative agreement with the ﬁndings by Marcucci et
al. [57], where the expressive power of information pro-
cessing using nonlinear wave ﬁelds was analyzed in terms
of the strength of the nonlinearity.
We will now turn to study the eﬀects of noise and non-
linear eﬀects in the gradient estimation. We will do it for
the case of the XOR scenario.
First, we studied the consequence of nonlinear eﬀects
in the gradient estimation - i.e. what happens for larger
values ofϵ. The backpropagating signal is proportional
to the gradient to ﬁrst order inϵ, but for large values of
ϵ the second order terms could be relevant. In ﬁgure 8(a)
we show the relative error in the update (with respect
to the ideal gradient descent) as a function ofϵ. The
relative error is deﬁned as|∆θj/η−∂θjC|/|∂θjC|, where
∆θj is the update in one training step.

===== PAGE 19 =====
19
1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0 1.0
2.0 3.0 5.0 6.010.0
a
e
Output
Training error
Iterations
Forward pass
Echo back- propagation
Self-learning 
Input
Iterations
Cost function
d
x
z
θ
a1
a2
0.0 1.0
Validation error1.00.0
χ2
χ1
c
1
0
0
1{
{
t=−T
t=−T/2
t=0
−T/3 2T/30 ϵ T/3 T−2T/3t=−T
Ψ
πθ
b
c
g
t=0 200T 400T 600T
2e-1
1e-1
1e-2
-1e-2
-1e-1
-2e-1
0
0 5e4 10e4 15e4
1.0100
10-1
f
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
HEB
True gradient
6e44e42e40 8e4 10e4
Averaged cost 
Iterations
Figure 7. Training a self-learning machine (simulations).(a) Time-evolution of the "evaluation ﬁeld" intensity|Ψ|2
during a forward pass for a machine that has learned to implement XOR (b = a1⊕a2). The region in which the interaction
with the learning ﬁeld occurs is enclosed by yellow dashed lines. (b) Time evolution of the learning ﬁeld momentumπθ during
a single training step. The pattern builds up from left to right as theΨ pulse propagates. It is time reversed and then partially
deleted as theΨ pulse travels back. The ﬁnite remainder at timeT is due to the injected error signal and produces the desired
learning update. (c) Evolution of the learning ﬁeldθ during many training steps. The training started with a smooth random
conﬁguration, and there are 600 HEB steps (each for a diﬀerent randomly chosen training sample). (d) Cost function evolution
during a particular training run for the model of (a)-(c). (e) Setup of a self-learning machine that learns to classify handwritten
digits (MNIST). The outcome is a one-hot encoding of the detected digit, i.e. one of 10 patches "lights up". (f) Training error
evolution of the MNIST setup for diﬀerent strengths of the wave ﬁeld nonlinearity. The line colors represent a diﬀerent value
of the parametersχ1, χ2. χ1 and χ2 are the nonlinear strengths at the convolutional and dense layers, respectively. The color
that represents each value ofχ1,χ 2 can be seen from (g). In the inset we display the cost function evolution when the SL
machine is trained via HEB (blue line). We compare it with the gradient descent according to the true gradient (red line),
with the same learning rate. The true gradient is obtained via autodiﬀerentiation. In order to better compare the results, we
average the cost function evolution over 10 diﬀerent trajectories.
(g) Final validation set classiﬁcation accuracy.
From the previous paragraph it would seem that it is
optimal to use the smallest possible value ofϵ. However,
in a real self-learning device there may be noise (intro-
duced during the time-reversal operation or other steps of
the scheme). Ifϵ is too small, noise will introduce signif-
icant errors into the gradient estimate provided by HEB.
We analyze the situation in 8(b). The root mean square
error is deﬁned as⟨|∆θj/η−∂θjC|2/|∂θjC|2⟩1/2, where
the average is taken with respect to the noisy signal. On
the other hand, for larger values ofϵ, the previously an-
alyzed nonlinear eﬀects dominate. The orange and green
dashed curves are a ﬁt to the expected behaviour of the
root mean square error in the limits of dominant noise
(1ϵ) and dominant nonlinear order eﬀects (ϵ).
We now analyze how to suppress the eﬀects of noise.
The operation of a SL machine is independent of the
Hamiltonian, and therefore one does not even need to
know the particularities of the device (including any pos-
sible deviations from intended fabrication) to make it
work. This is true because the time-reversal operation
produces an exact inversion of the Hamiltonian evolu-
tion, for any time-reversible Hamiltonian. One could
then wonder how sensitive HEB becomes to the preci-
sion of the time reversal. In fact, since the nonlinear
processes used to phase-conjugate signals can also am-
plify noise, there are practical limits to the performance
of a time-reversal mirror. Nevertheless, we will show here
that the eﬀects of noise in the time-reversal can be mit-
igated, although at the price of a longer training time.
In 8(c), we compare the results using a perfect time-

===== PAGE 20 =====
20
a
2nd order 
terms  
Noise
 b
/uni03BB=T
/uni03B7=10T
/uni03BB=e−n/500
T
/uni03BB=10T
/uni03C3noise=0,
Cost function
 c
Iterations
η=T
η=e−n/500
T
η=
10
T
Figure 8. The eﬀects of noise and nonlinear eﬀects in the gradient estimation.(a) The relative error in the
approximation of∂θjC, where θj is the value of the learning ﬁeld in the middle of the evolution domain. We compare the
update ofθj obtained via HEB with an accurate estimation that was computed by means of the ﬁnite diﬀerence method. the
result is presented as a function of the dimensionless quantityϵCmax, whereCmax is the maximum possible value of the cost
function. (b) The root mean square error of the update obtained by means of HEB in the presence of noise. On the one
hand, for small values ofϵ, the noise overwhelms the term proportional to the gradient. (c) Analyzing the inﬂuence of a noisy
time-reversal operation on training. Here we consider a discretized version of the nonlinear Schrödinger equation, where the
eﬀect of noise is more prominent. We display the cost function during training for diﬀerent values of the learning rate, at a
ﬁxed ﬁnite noise level whose standard deviation is given byσ2
noise = 0.05I (see Appendix A for details).
reversal (red line) with the results obtained in the case
of a noisy phase conjugation, for several values of the
learning rate (orange and blue), as well as for a suit-
ably chosen time-dependent learning rate ("learning rate
schedule", an approach also known for ANNs, with n
denoting the training step index). As it could be ex-
pected, the performance of the SL machine deteriorates
when the time-reversal is noisy. However, one can ob-
serve that decreasing the learning rate improves the ﬁ-
nal accuracy. This is because the overall update after
several steps will approximately cancel out the random
noise, if the learning rate is small enough. Indeed, the
backpropagating perturbation is a linear function of the
error signal, to ﬁrst order inϵ. Therefore, the update of
Θ in each step will be the sum of the appropriate gradi-
ent update plus a random signal that is proportional to
the noise in the time-reversal. If each update step does
not change the value ofΘ signiﬁcantly, the overall change
after several steps will average out the unwanted noise.
Note that this behaviour only applies to temporally ﬂuc-
tuatingnoise. Incaseofstaticsystematicdeviationsfrom
the correct time-reversal operation, an independent cal-
ibration of that operation would be required. Impor-
tantly, however, that would not rely on any knowledge of
the internal dynamics of the SL machine.
We note that in 8(c) we studied a discretized version
of the nonlinear wave ﬁeld device considered above. The
domain of theΨ and Θ ﬁelds is now a discrete lattice of
size 20× 30 (we don’t require that the ﬁelds are approx-
imately continuous). The reason for this choice is that
the cost function converges much closer to the optimal
value. In this way, we can appreciate the eﬀect of noise
on convergence more clearly.
VIII. IMPLEMENTATION CONSIDERATIONS
AND POTENTIAL HARDWARE PLATFORMS
The elements for a SL machine that we have presented
so far can be realized in many platforms. In fact, many
of the ingredients needed for implementations of our pro-
posal have already been demonstrated experimentally. In
some cases, the physical platforms that we consider be-
low were even already studied in the speciﬁc context of
building new ML hardware, but it was not known how to
train them sucessfully with physical procedures, without
the use of external computation and feedback. Hamilto-
nian Echo Backpropagation can now provide a means to
do this. Our only aim here is to give a brief overview of
the possibilities. It is clear that for each platform sub-
stantial further research will be required to come up with
an optimized design respecting the particular hardware
constraints, and to analyze the potential performance as
well as to take steps towards ﬁrst experimental realiza-
tions.
A. General remarks on speed, energy eﬃciency,
and scaling
In general, neuromorphic devices are designed to oﬀer
intrinsic parallelism, which means the time needed for
one evaluation becomes independent of the size of the
inputvector. HEBbuildsonthesameadvantage, withall
thephysicaldegreesoffreedom(e.g. waveﬁelds)evolving
in parallel.
In many big-data applications, an important bottle-
neck for the speed of training may be the RAM band-
width. For large ANNs, storing or retrieving the updated
weights at each step can be the most important contribu-

===== PAGE 21 =====
21
tion to the training time. That points to a considerable
potential advantage of training via HEB: the learning
ﬁeld is updated at the same time that the evaluation
ﬁeld propagates in the device, so there is no overhead
associated to memory retrieval.
Whether a self-learning machine can be more energy
eﬃcient than existing systems would depend of course on
the particular physical system used to implement it. It
has been claimed by other authors that some physical
neuromorphic platforms could be signiﬁcantly more eﬃ-
cient than electronic devices. For example, in photonic
integrated circuits the scaling of the power consumption
can be more favorable [14]. What we argue is that, if
one uses one of those promising physical platforms, which
compare favourably with digital devices, then training by
means of HEB is a particularly eﬃcient training method.
For example, it is deﬁnitely more eﬃcient than using a
method based on parameter shifts and feedback. Indeed,
applying the parameter shift method in a device with N
parameters requires O(N) forward passes, while we only
require O(1).
There is a further reason why we believe that self-
learning machines trained via HEB may be more eﬃcient
than electronic devices in the case of large networks. In
many of the most successful deep learning architectures,
the same parameters are reused in many parts of the
network. This can also be done in a physical learning
machine of the type we envisage here, when the learn-
ing ﬁeld interacts repeatedly with the evaluation ﬁeld.
This implies that the number of elementary operations
scales faster than the number of parameters. For ex-
ample, a convolutional ﬁlter of sizeM applied on anN
dimensional vector requires O(MN ) elementary opera-
tions. ForL layers, the number of elementary operations
would thus scale asO(LMN ). While for an electronic
device the energy consumption is roughly proportional
to the number of elementary operations, the scaling of
the energy consumption is diﬀerent for a time-reversible
machine. During the forward pass, the energy is con-
served (the dissipation is ideally nonexistent or at least
very low). The main energy consumption comes only
from the time-reversal operation, the decay step, as well
as the preparation of the initial states and injection of the
error signal. The overallunavoidableenergy consumption
for a time-reversible machine thus scales likeO(N +M),
where N and M are the dimension of the input vector
and of the vector of learning parameters, respectively.
Therefore, in general the scaling of the energy consump-
tion as a function of the system size is more favorable in
those cases where the number of elementary operations
scales faster than the number of parameters.
B. Nonlinear optical platforms
Optical approaches to neuromorphic computing have
recently attracted a lot of interest because they promise
signiﬁcant advantages in terms of speed, energy eﬃciency
or parallelism [17, 18, 36]. Importantly for us, those
schemes involve a combination of coherent (linear and
nonlinear) operations that are practically lossless, and
hence they are amenable to our proposal. Optical SL
machines would beneﬁt from high parallelism and fast
all-optical nonlinearities.
Inthenonlinear-opticsapproachtoneuromorphiccom-
puting, on-chip photonic circuits are one of the most
promising technologies for ML hardware. As discussed
in section VI, a scalable implementation of a nonlinear
core would be combination of linear local couplings and
local nonlinearities. A straightforward implementation
of a self-learning machine would be to have both the
evaluation ﬁeldΨ and the learning ﬁeldΘ be sent as
pulses into an arrangement of waveguides, beamsplitters
and cavities (some of them nonlinear), and to implement
time-reversal outside this ’nonlinear core’, as described in
section VI. The most direct implementation of a feedfor-
ward neural network would include layers of linear trans-
formationsalternatedwithnonlinearlayersimplementing
the nonlinear function. In this line, there are several ex-
perimental demonstrations and theoretical proposals of
deep neural networks based on programmable photonic
circuits (e.g. [17]). The nonlinear activation functions
could be provided, for example, by propagation inside a
material with a strong Kerr eﬀect, possibly enhanced via
the use of resonators [58].
The time-reversal operation could be implemented in
any of the approaches discussed for fast phase conjuga-
tion in the nonlinear-optics literature; speciﬁcally by em-
ployingnonlinearopticalinteractionsactingonthepulses
propagating along waveguides or ﬁbres, or, alternatively,
inside nonlinear cavities with multiple interacting modes.
We have already discussed energy eﬃciency of HEB in
general. Speciﬁcally for optical neural networks, it has
been suggested [17] that they can be orders of magni-
tude more eﬃcient in terms of power than their electronic
counterparts. An estimate of the power consumption
would depend on the details of the particular implemen-
tation, but in any case the matrix multiplications and
nonlinear activation functions are realized in the time-
reversible, ideally lossless manner. The dissipative steps
(phase conjugation, decay step, injection of input) re-
quire to dissipate (and/or resupply) an energy amount
on the order of the energy contained in the optical pulses
of the learning ﬁeld and evaluation ﬁeld. This follows
from the way these fundamentally dissipative operations
have to be implemented, as described before. We may
estimate a typical energy on the order of 1 fJ per wave
packet, where we assumed the packet to be a 1 mW pulse
of 1 ns duration, giving rise to suﬃcient nonlinearities in
typical optical nonlinear resonators. The number of wave
packets scales with the total number of learning parame-
ters and size of the input vector, which gives an estimate
for the total amount of energy dissipated per pass.
With respect to the footprint of a photonic implemen-
tation, the limiting factor would be the size of elementary
building blocks, such as beam splitters and resonators.

===== PAGE 22 =====
22
If nonlinear eﬀects are to take place during propagation
along waveguides (instead of inside resonant cavities),
then we also have to ask what is the minimum length
to impart a strong nonlinear eﬀect (e.g. a Kerr phase
shift ofπ on the wave ﬁelds), which is a function of the
material, the waveguide design (mode localization), and
the realistically feasible pulse energy.
In nanophotonic circuits, ﬁrst neuromorphic devices
with an area of about(100µm)2 per building block (tune-
able beam splitter, in that case) have been demonstrated
[17], but future engineering should be able to scale down
to around (10µm)2, as suggested by previous develop-
ments (e.g. [59]). 3D integration may make it possible to
realize large networks that are even more compact [60].
We can also provide an estimate of the minimum fea-
sible size of the nonlinear elements, based on the size
of current all-optical switches. For example, a nonlin-
ear microring resonator with a diameter of 70µm was
demonstrated to behave as an optical switch in the few
mW level or less, with low dissipation [58]. With respect
to the footprint of the components implementing decay
step and time-reversal operation, we observe that their
area scales only linearly with the number of degrees of
freedom. Hence their footprint is not the dominant con-
tribution in the large-scale (many-layer) limit. Addition-
ally, as explained above, phase conjugating mirrors can
be implemented by means of three- or four-wave mixing
processes, for example inside a microring resonator [61].
Therefore, the size of the phase-conjugating mirror could
be on the same order as a layer of nonlinearities. A sim-
ilar argument applies to the decay step, which requires
similar physical components.
With respect to the relevant time scales of a self-
learning machine based on integrated photonics, we can
also provide some rough estimates. The duration of a
training step has four contributions: the forward pass,
the time-reversal operation, the error injection, the back-
ward pass, and the decay step. The time-scale of the for-
ward pass (which has the same duration as the backward
pass) will be proportional to the number of layers. Each
layer would have a depth ofO(1) beamsplitters and non-
linearresonators. Forbeamsplitterswithasizeof 100µm,
the latency would be on the order of10ps. In the case of
the nonlinear microresonators, the relevant time-scale is
roughly given by the inverse of their maximum operating
bandwidth. For example, nonlinear microring resonators
can operate with100ps pulses [62].
As we argued above for the footprint, the duration
of the phase conjugation, decay step and error injection
will not be the main contribution in the large-scale limit.
Still, we can give some rough estimates. In the case of the
time-reversal, as one example, optical phase conjugation
has been demonstrated experimentally by means of a sili-
con waveguide [63] having a latency of around1ns. How-
ever, it is reasonable to expect much faster phase conju-
gating elements, operating in the100ps range, based on
nonlinear microring resonators [62]. With respect to the
decay step, the limiting factor would probably be the
step of parametric ampliﬁcation. Since parametric am-
pliﬁcation can be achieved by an adequate pumping of
a three- or four- wave mixing process, we believe that
the decay-step duration could be engineered to be on the
same order as that of the phase conjugating mirror. Fi-
nally, the error injection corresponds to the injection of a
signal and a phase shift element. Hence, the time-scale of
the error injection will be comparable to that of a single
linear layer, which was estimated to be on the order of
10ps.
Like for any platform suitable for HEB, dissipation
needs to be kept low, i.e. one needs to limit the attenu-
ation of the optical ﬁelds. Substantial progress has been
made in the area of integrated photonics in this regard,
by careful materials selection, fabrication processes, and
surface treatment as well as geometrical design. This has
led to record achievements like the recently reported [64]
ultralow-loss cavity in SiN with an optical quality factor
of 4·106, leading to a sub-MHz optical decay rate and rel-
ative losses less than10−4 on the100ps time scale. More
generally speaking, we point out that Hamiltonian Echo
Backpropagation in optical devices will proﬁt from the
current rapid push towards optical quantum computing,
since this involves the development of components with
extremely low loss and strong nonlinearities, which are
exactly the ingredients needed for our approach as well.
Moreover, besides these ongoing improvements, attenu-
ation could be compensated with coherent ampliﬁcation
(as we have mentioned before). In this way, one could
place layers of ampliﬁers inside the integrated circuit, in
such a way that the optical ﬁeld is retained. Alterna-
tively, the photonic device components could themselves
be built as an ampliﬁer (e.g. erbium-doped ﬁbers) with a
properly calibrated gain to compensate the loss. Similar
to all the other aspects discussed above, further research
will be needed, but the toolbox of nonlinear optics and
integrated photonics is by now advanced and versatile
enough for this challenge.
Another challenge in the case of optical implementa-
tions is the long-term storage of the learning degrees of
freedom. In our approach, during each pass the learning
ﬁeld, besides undergoing time-reversals and the ’decay
step’, will have to be slightly ampliﬁed to counteract the
small unavoidable losses. In this way, it is continuously
kept alive throughout both the training and inference
phases. However, eventually one will want to store it
somehow, in order to keep persistence for longer times
(indeﬁnitely, instead of seconds or minutes). This could
be done by performing a homodyne measurement on the
learning ﬁeld pulses and storing amplitude and phase on
a digital computer. A more physical approach would in-
volve holography. There are setups that have been pro-
posed in the past [8] that make use of holograms as a
means to store the learning degrees of freedom of a pho-
tonic learning machine. In this way, very high storage
densities could be attained [65]. Photorefractive holo-
grams, e.g. based on lithium niobate, can be persistent
for very extended periods, up to years.

===== PAGE 23 =====
23
Architectures beyond layered feedforward networks are
also realizable in integrated-photonics platforms. The
basic ingredients of a recurrent neural network, i.e. a
network with memory, can be implemented. One possi-
bility would be to inject the inputs corresponding to a
discrete time sequence as a train of wave packets, propa-
gating along a waveguide. Assume that the waveguide is
coupled to a ring resonator. If the pulse duration is much
shorter than the ring’s roundtrip travel time and the dis-
tance between pulses matches this time, then the sub-
sequent pulses will overlap in the ring. When nonlinear
interactions are present inside the ring, this is a way to
obtain recurrent dynamics, where the output depends on
the whole input sequence. Multiple such building blocks
can be combined sequentially or in parallel, although we
do not attempt here to work out a full working device.
Training via HEB is possible even in this scenario, by
time-reversing the whole train of pulses emerging out of
the device.
Finally, besides integrated photonics, another interest-
ing platform for optical HEB are possible. For example,
the architecture proposed by Skinner et al. [11] combines
free propagation inside a crystal and a spatially homo-
geneous Kerr nonlinearity. Another alternative may be
so-called optical Ising machines. Ising machines have
received a lot of attention in recent years [66–68]. An
Ising machine is an optical device that simulates the Ising
Hamiltonian. One common implementation is based on a
time-multiplexed train of pulses inside a ﬁber loop with
a degenerate optical parametric oscillator (OPO). Due
to the interaction with the OPO, the pulses have two
degenerate stable states that can be treated as spin-like
variables. A linear device in the ﬁber loop couples the
pulses in a way that is reminiscent of an Ising Hamilto-
nian. In this way, an artiﬁcial lattice can be implemented
with just a single ﬁber loop, e.g. demonstrating networks
with 2000 degrees of freedom [67]. Although more re-
search would be needed to work out a self-learning Ising
machine, we can already now see that such a setup has all
theelementsneededforourproposal: ithasverycomplex
nonlinear dynamics, it is possible to engineer a degener-
ate ground state forΘ, and it can be time-reversed. As
opposed to a standard photonic circuit, the number of
nonlinear physical components can be strongly reduced,
since they are re-used by the train of pulses.
C. Superconducting circuits
Beyond optical circuits, superconducting circuits are
another possible platform. In a somewhat similar fash-
ion to photonic circuits, a typical superconducting cir-
cuit can be described as a 2D arrangement of coupled
superconducting oscillators coupled by waveguides [69].
In fact, we can understand such superconducting oscil-
lators as cavities that operate in the microwave regime.
However, unlike photonic circuits, these superconducting
cavities are made by coupling superconducting inductors,
capacitors and Josephson junctions.
In this scenario, our learning and evaluation ﬁelds are
now microwave ﬁelds in the superconducting cavities. By
using Josephson junctions, it is possible to engineer such
superconducting cavities to induce strong non-dissipative
nonlinear interactions. We should remark that here we
consider that the circuit operates in the classical limit.
For the purpose of this paper, it suﬃces to understand
that it is possible to make lattices of coupled nonlinear
superconducting cavities. In the end, this platform is not
conceptually very diﬀerent of the optical platforms de-
scribed above, except for the fact that theΨ and Θ ﬁelds
are now in the microwave spectrum, and the nonlinear
elements are Josephson junctions. In appendix C, we de-
scribe some of the design possibilities for constructing a
self-learning machine based on this platform. Further-
more, we show some numerical results on the simulation
of a self-learning device based on an array of nonlinear
cavities, which could be implemented by means of a su-
perconducting circuit. This example also illustrates the
case of a self-learning device in which the learning ﬁeld
is always localized entirely inside the nonlinear core.
The potential of superconducting circuits for fast and
low-power classical computation has been recognized
early on, which led to the development of so-called rapid
single ﬂux quantum logic in the 1990s. Although the sig-
niﬁcant advances in more conventional electronics have
resigned this to the status of a niche application, it has
more recently been considered as fast control electron-
ics for quantum processors. In addition, classical super-
conducting circuits are now being considered for realiz-
ing forms of artiﬁcial spiking neuron hardware [22], e.g.
based on superconducting nanowires [70], although these
are designed to work in a dissipative regime. At the
same time, the past 20 years have seen impressive ad-
vances in superconducting circuits operating in the quan-
tum regime for quantum computation and simulation,
building especially on superconducting microwave cavi-
ties that are made nonlinear by interaction with Joseph-
son junction-based elements. Such applications have
driven the signiﬁcant minimization of losses, which is im-
portant for our purposes. Taken together, this means
there now exists a very sophisticated toolbox for super-
conducting circuits that can be exploited for Hamiltonian
Echo Backpropagation.
Regarding their footprint, microwave cavities range
from cm-scale (for 3D cavities and transmission line res-
onators) down to (100µm)2 in a lumped-element LC-
circuitimplementation(theJosephsonelementsaremuch
smaller and can be neglected here). Even though over-
all we do not expect the same integration density as for
optics, such circuits oﬀer the attractive possibility to be
integrated on-chip with quantum information processing
devices, making use of the same technology. This would
provide online self-learning on real devices with negligi-
ble latency and no signal distortion by propagation on
cables to the outside.
Coherence times in qubits now reach several 100µs,

===== PAGE 24 =====
24
in cavities even up to10ms, while strong nonlinear ef-
fects at the single-photon level can be obtained during
times of around 500ns or less. We intend operation in
the classical regime, at much higher photon numbersn,
where nonlinearities are enhanced, e.g. reducing the time
needed for acquiring a Kerr-eﬀect phase shift ofπ by a
factor 1/n. Thus, in a conservative estimate, dissipation
per nonlinear pi-phase-shift could be as low as10−2/n,
with n easily reaching the order of106 or higher. This
produces to an extremely good approximation the time-
reversal-invariant Hamiltonian dynamics we are striving
for, turning such systems into a very promising platform.
D. Other approaches
Approaches not based on optics or superconducting
circuits are also possible, though we will only mention
them brieﬂy, and their detailed design would be a chal-
lenge for future research.
Clouds of cold atoms or molecules, possibly trapped in
optical lattices, oﬀer the possibility of storing informa-
tion in the density distribution or the molecular orien-
tation, making longer-term storage of the learning ﬁeld
Θ in principle less challenging than in the case of opti-
cal cavities. The interaction of an optical ﬁeldΨ with
the atomic or molecular cloud would also provide strong
optical nonlinear self-interactions, as has been demon-
strated with Rydberg atom clouds. Alternatively, the
ﬁelds themselves could be realized as macroscopically
populated, classical matter waves. This directly leads
to the nonlinear Schrödinger equation, which we showed
to be useful for HEB in our numerical examples. Four-
wave mixing and phase conjugation with matter waves
have been demonstrated early on [46].
Likewise, spin waves share all the required ingredients
for a SL machine. We must remark that time-reversal
symmetry must not be broken, which means that spin-
spin interactions may be acceptable, but not (for exam-
ple) light-magnon interactions via the Faraday eﬀect. In
the case of spin waves, there are already experimental
demonstrations of strong nonlinear interactions that give
rise to sigmoid-like activation functions [71], and phase
conjugation by nonlinear interactions has been demon-
strated [48].
IX. CONCLUSIONS
In this work we have introduced a general method,
Hamiltonian Echo Backpropagation, to train SL ma-
chines based on Hamiltonian physical systems. For any
physical device that meets some general assumptions, our
method is guaranteed to realize gradient descent opti-
mization of a cost function. The HEB procedure up-
dates the learning parameters autonomously andin situ,
leveraging all the advantages of a neuromorphic device.
Whether the physical device could achieve a good per-
formance on a particular task will depend on its size
and its expressive power, but our method can always
ﬁnd a local minimum of the cost function via physical
dynamics. Our numerical simulations illustrate how it
can be applied both to simple physical systems and also
to other more sophisticated architectures. In fact, we
showed an example of its application in the case of a pho-
tonic convolutional neural network used for image recog-
nition. Although there are many previous proposals and
even experimental implementations of photonic learning
machines, most of their potential advantages cannot be
leveraged without a training method that is fully au-
tonomous. We believe that when HEB is directly applied
to such photonic devices, this will greatly enhance their
capabilities.
Going beyond the realm of photonics, there are many
other promising physical platforms for machine learning
hardware, as we have mentioned. We believe that our
method would be especially helpful when there is no con-
trol over the internal dynamics of the device. Indeed,
since none of the steps in HEB depend on the underlying
Hamiltonian, one can use the physical device as a black
box. In this way, HEB is insensitive to device variability
brought about by fabrication imperfections, and it can
also cope well with noise (as we have shown in one of our
numerical examples), which is particularly important in
low-power applications with a suppressed signal-to-noise
ratio. Our method not only allows to consider various
physical platforms, it will also make easier to explore
new architectures. As opposed to other previous pro-
posals, HEB does not rely on a sequential multi-layered
structure, which means that it can be used to train new
architectures going beyond the structure of a standard
ANN.
The code used for the numerical examples is available
on Github [72].
Acknowledgments
We thank Dirk Englund and Stefan Krastanov for in-
sightful discussions on some aspects of experimental im-
plementations in the domain of integrated photonics.
Appendix A EXAMPLE: XOR FUNCTION
The ﬁrst example of a SL machine that we show has
a particularly simple architecture. The evaluation dy-
namical variable is a nonlinear wave ﬁeld propagating in
a 2D square lattice. We consider a tight-binding model
with hard-wall boundary conditions in which every node
of the lattice is coupled to its nearest neighbours. At
each site of the lattice there is a nonlinear attractive
Kerr self-interaction. The learning dynamical variable
is given by another ﬁeld that does not propagate. We
assume that the learning ﬁeld and the evaluation ﬁeld in-
teract through a term in the Hamiltonian given byθΨ∗Ψ,

===== PAGE 25 =====
25
which is the simplest term that can produce local phase
shifts.
During the time-reversible steps, the equations of mo-
tion for both ﬁelds are given by
i ˙Ψ = β
2∇2Ψ +
(
χθ +g|Ψ|2)
Ψ, (29)
i ˙Θ =iΩπθ +χ|Ψ|2. (30)
The hard-wall boundary conditions are given byΨ(x =
0,z ) = Ψ(x =W,z ) = Ψ(x,z = 0) = Ψ(x,z =L) = 0.
During the decay step, the evolution ofθ is given by
˙θ = Ωπθ, ˙πθ =−Γπθ.
The goal of this example is to learn a simple logical
function. In particular, we choose the XOR function,
b = a1⊕a2, since it is well known that it cannot be
learned by a single-layer perceptron. For each logical
input, (a0,a 1), we provide a physical input as a superpo-
sition of wave packets,Ψ(x,−T ) =f0(x,a 0) +f1(x,a 1).
Each wave packet,fs(x,as), is a gaussian wave packet
centered around ((2s + 1)W/8 +asW/2,lin), s∈{ 0, 1}
whose standard deviation is given by σ. In addition,
each wave packet has an initial positive momentum in the
propagation direction. In this way, each input boolean
variableas is encoded in the position of the center of the
corresponding wave packet.
We train such a self-learning machine to learn the XOR
function using Hamiltonian echo back-propagation. The
cost function is given by
C :=
∫
dxdzφ (x)|Ψ(x, 0)− Ψtar(x,b )|2, (31)
where φ(x,b ) = 1
2πσ 2
φ
.∑1
j=0e−(x−xout
j )2/(2σ2
φ) is a sum of
two Gaussian functions centered aroundxout
0 = (w, 0.8L)
and xout
1 = (3w, 0.8L), respectively. The target ﬁeld,
Ψtar(x,b ), is also a Gaussian function centered around
xout
b . Therefore, our cost function is a version of the MSE
weighted byφ(x). In this way, the SL machine tries to ﬁt
Ψ(x, 0) to Ψtar(x)inside the peaks ofphi(x), where the
output is measured. We ﬁnally evaluate the accuracy by
the following prescription: if|Ψ(xout
0 , 0)| >|Ψ(xout
1 , 0)|,
the logical output is 0; otherwise it is 1.
In order to solve numerically the equations of motion
for the time-reversible steps, we used a split-step method.
In particular, we used the symmetrized Fourier split step
method, which takes half a time step using the linear op-
erator in momentum space, then takes a full-time step
with the nonlinear operator in position space, and then
takes a second half time step again with the linear op-
erator in momentum space. In order to satisfy hard
wall boundary conditions, the discrete sine transform was
used. We approximate the eﬀect of the cost function per-
turbation by a single small Euler step att = 0 (this is a
reasonable approximation whenϵ is small enough). For
the decay step, we assumed that we are in the regime in
which Eq.(7) applies. Therefore, for each HEB step we
simulate a forward pass, a backward pass and then we
update the parameters according to Eq.(7).
We used a square lattice with 50× 150 sites. The
nonlinear strength was chosen asg = 102I−1T−1, where
I := (2σ)−2∫
dxdz|Ψ|2 is a measure of the peak inten-
sity of the input ﬁeld. In this way, the accumulated phase
shift due to the nonlinear self-interaction is much larger
than 2π. Thedispersioncoeﬃcienthastobelargeenough
to prevent a self-focusing collapse. This implies that
β
2∇2Ψ should be at least on the same order asg|Ψ|2Ψ.
In our numerical simulation, we setβ = 102 (2σ)2
T . With
this choice of parameters, one can check in the numer-
ical simulations that the extent of the wave packets re-
mains in the order of (2σ)2 during the whole forward
pass. We choose the initial momentum of the wave pack-
ets askz = 3
4
L
Tβ , so that they propagate a distance3L/4
during the forward pass.
The parameter Ω determines the rate of change ofθ.
In order to have results that can be more easily inter-
preted, we work in the regime in whichθ remains al-
most constant during a single forward pass. Hence, we
choose Ω = 10 −2T. Next, we must choose Γ so that
Ω
Γ ≫ ∂C
∂πθ(−T)
(
∂C
∂θ(−T)
)−1
, if we want to work in the
regime in which Eq.(7) applies. Since the cost func-
tion depends onπθ only indirectly, through the evolution
of θ, one can estimate that ∂C
∂πθ(−T) is on the order of
ΩT ∂C
∂θ(−T). Hence, we must make sure that 1/Γ≫ T.
In particular, we set Γ = 10 −2T. After one training
step, the update in θ is of the order ofϵ Ω
ΓχI. Hence,
the change in the phase shift inΨ due to the interaction
withθ is in the order ofϵ Ω
Γχ2IT . On the one hand, this
update must be small enough so that the stochastic gra-
dient descent works. On the other hand, it should not
be so small that the training progress is too slow. We
choose χ = 102( Ω
ΓϵIT
)1/2
. In our numerical simulations,
we setI = 1, T = 1, L = 3, σ = 0.1.
Appendix B EXAMPLE: IMAGE
RECOGNITION
As an illustrative example of a SL machine, we con-
sidered a device based on a photonic neural network pro-
posed by Ong et al [56], thereby showing how an existing
device design can proﬁt from our self-learning procedure.
It is composed of three convolutional layers followed by
a dense fully-connected layer. The nonlinearity is pro-
vided by aχ(2) optical nonlinearity, as described in Eq.
(32). Both the convolutional layers and the fully con-
nectedlayercanbeimplementedbyasequenceofdiscrete
Fourier transforms (DFTs) and learnable phase shifts. In
Ong et al., the activation function is a complex version
of the ReLU function. Instead, we choose the activation
function given by aχ(2) nonlinear interaction, which in
principle can be implemented in a physical setup. As a
cost function, we choose the mean square error on the

===== PAGE 26 =====
26
intensity.
The processing inside the photonic convolutional neu-
ral network that we consider is composed of a sequence
of operations acting on a 2D square grid ofN×N modes.
In addition to the evaluation modes, there are learning
and ancillary modes that take part in the sequential op-
erations and also have to be time-reversed.
Any convolution (with periodic boundary conditions)
is diagonalized by the DFT. Therefore, the weight matrix
in a convolutional layer can be performed by applying
a DFT, then a diagonal matrix, and ﬁnally the inverse
DFT. In the case of a unitary convolution, the diagonal
matrix is of the formDjj =eiθj (i.e., a phase mask). All
these three operations are unitary operations that can be
implemented with a lossless photonic circuit. The DFT
matrix is of course ﬁxed; all the learning parameters,θj,
are contained in the phase mask.
The last two layers of the network are fully connected,
and they should be able to express any arbitrary complex
matrix. The implementation of these fully connected lay-
ers was not descibed in [56], so we provide a possible ver-
sion here. We use a decomposition based on the singular
value decomposition. In the singular value decomposi-
tion, any complex matrix can be cast as a product of
the formUSV , whereU, V are unitary matrices andS
is a diagonal matrix. The unitary matrices can always
be expressed as a product of the formU = D0
∏FDi,
where F are DFT matrices andDi are diagonal unitary
matrices (phase masks) [73]. Finally, the singular value
matrix,S, can be implemented by means of a linear inter-
action with an ancilla, provided that the singular values
are bounded bySii≤ 1. This is achieved by coupling
every relevant mode to an ancilla mode by a means of a
general SU(2) linear transformation, when the ancilla is
initially zero. Any such transformation can be achieved
by means of the product of a 50-50 beam-splitter, a phase
shift, and another 50-50 beam-splitter. Since an overall
scaling factor in the weight matrix is unimportant, it is
suﬃcient that our implementation can produce any com-
plex matrix with|Sii|≤ 1.
All the trainable parameters are contained in the phase
shifts, which in this example are realized by a local inter-
action Hamiltonian given byθΨ∗Ψ. Just like in the ﬁrst
example, we assume that the machine operates in the
limit in which the dissipation time-scale is much longer
than the duration of a forward pass.
For the numerical implementation, we solved the evo-
lution of the evaluation and learning ﬁelds in a sequential
manner. There are ﬁve kinds of operations inside each
forward pass: (1) DFT’s, (2) the interaction ofΨ and Θ,
(3) the interaction ofΨand Ψanc (the ancilla in the dense
layers), (4) the nonlinear activation function, and (5) the
costfunctionperturbation. Eachofthesestepsrepresents
adiﬀerentlayerinthephotonicdevice, andthereforethey
can be solved separately. The 2D DFT was performed by
meansofafastFouriertransformalgorithm. Thestep(2)
corresponds to the interaction described by the Hamilto-
nian H = χlθΨ∗Ψ. The equations of motion for this
step can easily be solved analytically. Therefore, we can
calculate the overall eﬀect of the step (2) by means of
a simple formula. In the same way, the step (3) is de-
scribed by the HamiltonianH = J(Ψ∗Ψanc + ΨΨ∗
anc),
which can also be solved analytically. The step (4) is
integrable too, with the solution given by Eq.(32). The
step (5) is a small perturbation that can be well approx-
imated by a single Runge-Kutta step. For the backward
pass, the same operations are performed, but starting
with the phase conjugation of the output of the forward
pass. Of course, one has to time-reverse not only the
evaluation ﬁeld, but also all the ancillary and learning
variables.
The photonic convolutional neural network that we
considered has three convolutional layers and two fully
connected layers. The convolutional layers are some-
what unconventional: they only have one ﬁlter, but it
has the same size of the output. As we already de-
scribed, this is accomplished by an alternation of a DFT,
a phase mask and another DFT. The ﬁrst DFT acts on
the full input image with N2 modes, while the phase
mask and the second DFT act only on the innermost
M2 modes. The rest of the modes are considered to
be ancillary modes. In particular, the ﬁrst layer has
(N,M ) = (31 , 31), the second has (N,M ) = (31 , 21),
and the third has(N,M ) = (21, 17). The size of the in-
put and output of the fully connected layers are(17, 9)
and (9, 4), respectively. The input of the network is a
rescaledversionofthecorrespondingimagefromMNIST.
The intensity of the ﬁeld at each input mode goes from0
toImax (which has units of the square root of an action).
In the numerical simulation, we setImax = 1. Also, we
set that all the elementary steps (activation functions,
interaction withθ, etc.) have durationTs = 1. At the
convolutional and dense layers we have two diﬀerent val-
ues of the nonlinear strength, which are given byχ1 and
χ2 respectively. From Eq.(32) one can deduce that both
χ1 and χ2 have to be chosen so thatχi|Ψ|Ts ≈ 1 for
the dynamics to be strongly nonlinear. The nonlinear
strength was chosen as described in ﬁgure 7. The cou-
pling to the ancilla is given byJ = 101T−1
s , since we want
to ensure that the mixing of the ancilla and the relevant
modes is on the order of 1.
With regard to the decay step, it is assumed that we
are in the regime in which Eq.(7) applies. Therefore, for
each HEB step we simulate a forward pass, a backward
pass and then we update the parameters according to
Eq.(7). The coeﬃcient of the cost function perturbation
is taken to beϵ = 10−2, and we set Ω = 10−1T−1 so
that the update of θ during a single forward pass can
be neglected. We use a damping coeﬃcient given byΓ =
10−1T−1 so that the learning rate is given byη = 10−2T.
Finally, by a similar argument to the learning of the XOR
function, we set χl = 10 1
(
Ω
ΓϵImaxT
)1/2
(see Appendix
A).

===== PAGE 27 =====
27
Appendix C IMPLEMENTATION IN
SUPERCONDUCTING MICROWAVE CIRCUITS
For our purposes, the simplest implementation would
consist of a Josephson junction array, which is essen-
tially a lattice of connected capacitors, inductors, and
Josephson junctions. There is considerable design free-
dom, since one can choose the connectivity via the elec-
tronic wiring topology and the properties of the individ-
ual elements by parameters such as the junction area etc.
Such an array implements a discrete nonlinear metama-
terial. A classical Hamiltonian is obtained [74] by in-
troducing node ﬂuxesφn via the time integrals of volt-
ages across the circuit elements, and node chargesqn via
the time integrals of currents. These form canonically
conjugate variables, withqn taking the role of momenta,
such that the equations of motion for the circuit follow as
˙φn =∂H/∂qn and ˙qn =−∂H/∂φn. The node ﬂuxes are
proportional to the superconducting condensate phase at
each location in the circuit, and their diﬀerence across a
Josephson junction indicates the phase diﬀerence that
determines the energy. As an example, in a simple 1D
array one can produce the Hamiltonian of a discrete sine-
Gordon model,H =∑
n(2C)−1q2
n−EJ cos(ϕn+1−ϕn),
withϕn = (2e/ℏ)φn. The capacitanceC and the Joseph-
son energy EJ characterize the circuit elements. De-
spite the appearance of Planck’s quantumℏ in this for-
mula, one can operate in the classical regime by ensuring
EJ ≫ e2/C. More elaborate setups employ arrays of
coupled microwave modes (produced using transmission
line resonators, 3D cavities, or lumped-element LC cir-
cuits) which are modeled as LC oscillators in the Hamil-
tonian and which can be made nonlinear by the inser-
tion of Josephson junctions. Expanding thecos term in
the ﬁeld amplitude yields a description of coupled modes
analogous to nonlinear quantum optics (with Kerr terms
etc.). Since the Hamiltonian is time-reversal invariant
in the absence of external magnetic ﬁelds, this platform
fulﬁlls all the requirements for HEB, provided a suitable
mechanism for the echo and decay steps is implemented,
following our prescriptions in the main text VI.
Inasimplecircuitofthistype, themainconceptualdif-
ference in contrast to nonlinear optical platforms is the
absence of a natural propagation direction, which makes
the circuit a fully recurrent device in the language of
neural networks (no layers, no feedforward processing).
This could be circumvented by employing transmission
lines as waveguides, coupled to nonlinear microwave cav-
ities, resulting in a setup whose mathematical descrip-
tion is completely equivalent to that presented earlier for
the nonlinear integrated photonics platform, only oper-
ating in a diﬀerent frequency regime (and with diﬀerent
physical mechanisms for tunability, as well as consider-
ably stronger nonlinearities). Nonlinear wave dynamics,
and applications like ampliﬁers, have been experimen-
tally demonstrated in that type of setup.
However, it would also be interesting to explore phys-
ical learning machines beyond the standard feedforward
architecture. In fact, the idea of using nonlinear physi-
cal dynamics as an analog implementation of a recurrent
neural network was already considered by T. W. Hughes
et al. [75]. Moreover, Tureci et al. [76] already stud-
ied the use of a superconducting circuit as an analog
implementation of a reservoir computer with recurrent
architecture. We take this opportunity to demonstrate
the generality of our approach and consider deliberately
a recurrent circuit. (see next appendix).
We argue that there are promising applications for a
learningdevicesuchliketheonewedescribeinthefollow-
ing appendix. For example, a similar learning device was
proposed in a recent paper as a tool for eﬃcient quantum
state measurement [76]. In their proposal, which is based
on the ideas of reservoir computing, the physical degrees
of freedom are not trained. Instead, they require exter-
nal post-processing that has to be trained. Our scheme
could potentially allow to perform trainingin situ in a
more eﬃcient way.
Appendix D NUMERICAL EXAMPLE: CAVITY
ARRAY
In the main text, we have described two numerical ex-
amples, involving propagation of nonlinear wave ﬁelds
that could be obtained either in a bulk medium or in in-
tegrated photonic circuits. Here, we will present numer-
ical simulations for a third platform, namely cavity ar-
rays. This is inspired by the superconducting microwave
circuits (see previous appendix and discussion in main
text), where it could be implemented.
In contrast to the examples considered in the main
text, we note that this will require a mechanism to time-
revert the ﬁelds inside all the cavities, and thus denies
the treatement of the self-learning machine as an arbi-
trary’blackbox’, whichhadbeenpossibleiftime-reversal
and decay took place outside the device, as in the opti-
cal case. Nevertheless, given the great amount of en-
gineering control available nowadays in these platforms,
that is not a major constraint. Imagine a setup of cou-
pled microwave cavities which have been made nonlinear
by insertion of Josephson junctions and which can be
driven parametrically by externally applied microwave
drives (a standard scheme in manipulating such cavities,
employed routinely for quantum information processing).
This makes it possible to implement the crucial steps of
our protocol: time-reversal, decay of the learning ﬁeld,
and injection of the error signal (as well as refreshing the
input after one learning sample has been processed).
Consider the simplest kind of scenario, where an array
of such nonlinear superconducting microwave cavities is
arranged in a square lattice, with each cavity identical in
thesimplestcase(thoughstaticdisorderisnotaproblem,
unless it aﬀects the time-reversal or the decay step). In
a coupled-mode description, we have the Hamiltonian

===== PAGE 28 =====
28
H =−
∑
m,n
Jmna∗
man +g
∑
n
(a∗
nan)2
We distinguish betweenΨ-cavities andΘ-cavities, but
their the only diﬀerence consists in the operations we ap-
ply to them: At the beginning, the ﬁeld amplitude inside
the Ψ-cavities is quenched to zero and then the training
input is stored inside them. Afterwards, the evolution ac-
cording toH takes place. After a time-intervalT, time
reversal is applied to all cavities, using the kind of para-
metric setup discussed elsewhere in this manuscript. The
error signal is injected, and after a further timeT, the
ﬁnal decay step takes place.
We have numerically investigated this example, and
again we trained it for the XOR training case, where
only two input modes and two output modes are needed.
The setup is explained in ﬁgure 9(a).
The setup consists ofN2 cavities that encode Θ and
4 additional cavities that encode Ψ (two input modes,
two output modes). The cavities corresponding toΘ are
placed in aN×N square array. The cavities correspond-
ing to Ψ are placed in the corners. We setN = 4. The
Hamiltonian is given by a linear term that couples the
neighbouring modes and a homogeneous local Kerr non-
linearity. To be precise, the linear term corresponds to
a square tight-binding lattice. We work in a regime in
which the ratio between the coupling strength of the tight
binding Hamiltonian andgI is very large:J/(gI)≈ 10,
whereI is the average intensity of theΦ ﬁeld. We empiri-
cally observe that in this regime the self-learning machine
can train successfully. On the other hand, much larger
nonlinearities often seem to lead to convergence issues.
We would not want to have that the output value is
very sensitive to the speciﬁc timing of the readout of the
output. For this reason, we also set thatK/J≈ 10. In
this way, the fast oscillations of the modes of the lattice
are averaged out in the output.
Due to the Kerr nonlinearity, the modes of the lat-
tice will interact with each other via four-wave mixing
processes. We ensure that the interaction time is long
enough that diﬀerent modes of the lattice can completely
mix with each other. In other words, we make sure that
gIT ≫ 2π.
We simulate the dynamics by means of the Fourier
split-step method. In ﬁgure 9(b) we can observe that
there is a ﬁnite range in the values of the input intensity
for which the training is optimal (notice the logarithmic
scale). In ﬁgure 9(c) we study the eﬀect of fabrication im-
perfections. In particular, we consider that the Hamilto-
nian of the device deviates from the ideal Hamiltonian by
a random term that describes the fabrication imperfec-
tions. The random term in the Hamiltonian corresponds
to random frequency shifts of each cavity mode in the
lattice. The frequency shifts are drawn from a Gaus-
sian distribution centered around 0 and with deviation
given byσ∆. Crucially, HEB does not need knowledge of
these random imperfections in order to realize backprop-
agation. We observe that the self-learning machine can
minimize the cost function even for relatively large values
ofσ∆, in the order of0.3πT. For very large values ofσ∆,
even though it still performs gradient descent, the device
seems to converge to poor local minima. Figures 9(d-f)
show the evolution of the output values during training,
the evolution of the output during a single forward pass,
and the eﬀect of noise in the input.
Appendix E INGREDIENTS OF THE
HAMILTONIAN: LINEAR AND NONLINEAR
PARTS
The dynamics ofΨ and Θ is given by the Hamiltonian
HSL. If one wants to use a SL machine for any useful
task, the dynamics ofΨ must be complex and nonlinear.
The expressive power of ANN’s can only be matched if
theequationsofmotionfor Ψincorporatenonlinearinter-
actions, as well as interactions with the learning param-
eters encoded in Θ. However, the input-output relation
must be deterministic and robust to small amounts of
noise. These considerations should guide the choice of
the Hamiltonians.
As we discuss later in this section, there is a consider-
able amount of theoretical and experimental work about
the time reversal of wave ﬁelds, especially in nonlinear
optics. For this reason, here and henceforth we will con-
centrate on approaches based on nonlinear wave ﬁelds.
Here, Ψ(x) and Θ(x) are complex ﬁelds deﬁned on a con-
tinuous space, or in a discrete lattice. Although we make
extensive use of a notation that is reminiscent of optical
ﬁelds, we must remember that, actually, the setting is
completely general (the real and imaginary parts of the
ﬁeld are the two conjugate coordinates of a completely
general Hamiltonian degree of freedom). However, the
fact that we have now assumed Ψ(x) and Θ(x) to be
ﬁelds allows us to make use of the notion of locality.
In a SL machine based on wave ﬁelds,HΨ would be
composed of two parts: afree-ﬁeldHamiltonianH0, and
a second termHNL containing local self-interactions. We
can deﬁne a free-ﬁeld Hamiltonian as any quadratic func-
tion of Ψ, Ψ∗ and its time- and space-derivatives. More
restrictively, we can ask that H0 is invariant with re-
spect to a global phase shift ofΨ, so that the total inten-
sity,
∫
dDx|Ψ|2, is a conserved charge. In that case,H0
can only contain second-order terms that are bilinear in
Ψ, Ψ∗.
To produce non-linear dynamics, we introduce the self-
interacting term,HNL. Often, this will be a local term.
Typical examples of self-interaction Hamiltonians would
be the familiar Kerr nonlinearity,g|Ψ|4, or a Josephson
nonlinearity,χ cosψ, that can become relevant for super-
conducting circuit quantum electrodynamics.
The free-ﬁeld Hamiltonian together with a self-
interaction is enough to obtain very complicated dynam-
ics. But if we want to train the SL machine, we still need
tointroducesomedependenceonthelearningparameters

===== PAGE 29 =====
29
a
d
 b  c
 e  f
[0 0], [1 1]
[1 0], [0 1]
[1 0]
[0 1]
[1 1]
[0 0]
K
J
Ψ0 Ψ1
Ψ2 Ψ3
Θij
Iin σΔ
Figure 9. Self-learning machine based on an array of nonlinear cavities (simulations)(a) Schematics of the setup:
the cavities that encode the learning degrees of freedom are placed on a 2D square lattice. Each nonlinearΘij cavity is coupled
to its nearest neighbours, with a coupling strength given byJ. The cavities that represent the evaluation degrees of freedom,
Ψi, are coupled to theΘij cavities in the corners of the lattice, and the coupling strength is given byK. All cavities have
an identical Kerr nonlinearity whose strength is given byg. The input is encoded in the initial values of(ψ0(−T ),ψ 1(−T )),
while the output is given byψ3(0). (b) Training error evolution for diﬀerent values of the intensity of the input. We choose
a reference level of intensityI0 that fulﬁllsgI0T = 3. (c) In this plot we consider the robustness of the SL machine to
fabrication imperfections. In particular we consider that each cavity has a random frequency shift whose distribution is given
byN (0,σ ∆). Note that, since the random shifts are on the order of0.1π/T− 1π/T, their eﬀect on the output value is very
signiﬁcant. The HEB method can successfully implement gradient descent in the imperfect machine (since it is Hamiltonian
independent). However, for larger values ofσ∆, the training process seems to converge to worse performance. Nevertheless,
this result shows robustness to signiﬁcant fabrication imperfections. (d) Evolution of the output as the training progresses
(with an input intensity given byIin = 1.6I0). Each curve represents each diﬀerent input. (e) Time evolution of the ﬁeld
amplitude in the output cavity during a single forward pass, once the SL machine has been trained. (f) Outputs obtained when
the input is noisy. We generated noisy inputs by adding Gaussian noise to the ideal input. After feeding each input to the SL
machine, a noisy output is obtained. Here we plot the resulting outputs vs the standard deviation of the Gaussian noise. We
can observe that the output remains highly concentrated around the target value whenσnoise is in the range of0− 3% of the
input amplitude.
through the interaction Hamiltonian,Hint. In analogy
with ANN’s, we may ask that the interaction produces
dynamics linear inΨ, although this is not a requirement.
Moreover, Hint will also be local in most realistic set-
tings. Therefore, the most reasonable choices for Hint
are gΘ∗ΘΨ∗Ψ (in nonlinear optics, this is calledcross-
phase modulation), org(Θ + Θ∗)Ψ∗Ψ (the standardχ(2)
interaction in optics, or equivalently an optomechanical
interaction), or in general some interaction of the form
f(Θ, Θ∗)Ψ∗Ψ. Alternatively, parametric interactions of
the typef(Θ, Θ∗)Ψ∗Ψ∗ + c.c. could also be considered,
leading to a diﬀerent kind of dynamics, although we will
not discuss them here.
With respect to the strength of the nonlinear interac-
tions, it should be large enough to attain a complex and
highlyexpressivedynamics. However, somestronglynon-
linear physical systems may exhibit chaotic behaviour.
A system with strong sensitivity to the initial condi-
tions is undesirable because any small perturbation can
be strongly ampliﬁed, making impossible in practice to
realize the time-reversed replica during the echo step.
Ideally, in order to avoid strong sensitivity to the initial
conditions while maximizing the expressivity of the de-
vice, the Lyapunov exponents should scale in such a way
that the device is operated near the onset of chaos, but
below it. Connected to this, a recent paper showed nu-
merical evidence that some neuromorphic devices achieve
optimal performance in the edge of chaos [77]. Other re-
cent related works have studied how transient chaos can
improve the expressive power of neural networks [78–80].
The Hamiltonian terms we described could be homo-
geneous across space, like in the case of an optical ﬁeld

===== PAGE 30 =====
30
propagating inside a nonlinear crystal, or they could be
implemented using discrete building blocks, as it would
be the case for a photonic or microwave circuit with non-
linear elements. It can be argued that the evolution ofΨ
under the joint action ofH0 +Hint +HNL is very similar
to the evaluation of an ANN (as argued in other works
before, see e.g. [8, 11, 75]). On the one hand, the eﬀect
of HNL is to induce a nonlinear activation function. On
the other hand, the partH0 +Hint is quadratic inΨ and
can be thought of as implementing the trainable matrix
of weights.
It is known that local controllable shifts together with
ﬁxed unitary operations are enough to realize any uni-
tary transformation [81]. Of course, it needs to be noted
that standard ANNs can have arbitrary weight matrices
between layers, which seem to go beyond the unitary ma-
trices available in the present setting. However, any arbi-
trary matrix can be embedded in a larger unitary matrix
(with proper rescaling). For this reason, the structure of
the linear part of the ANN can always be replicated in a
SL machine. Alternatively, we may view an SL machine
with unitary evolution as realizing a particular case of an
invertible neural network.
Appendix F PSEUDO-DISSIPATION VIA
ANCILLARY MODES
As we said in an earlier section, pseudo-dissipation via
ancillary modes can be a useful feature in a SL machine.
We can imagine that in our SL machine there are dy-
namical variables that are coupled toΨ until some par-
ticular time, after which they evolve separately. Instead
of explicitly switching oﬀ the couplings as a function of
time, we might also just have wave ﬁelds propagating
out of the region where interactions are present. This
can easily be arranged, e.g. in photonic circuits. The
ancillary dynamical variables carry away part of the in-
formation, reconciling the contractive mapping with the
overall time-reversal symmetry of the SL machine. We
start with a high dimensional input, but as time passes,
the dimension of the interacting part of the system is
increasingly reduced. In the end, the dimension of the
output may be much smaller than the original input di-
mension. Importantly, in the echo step of HEB, the out-
put and the ancilla must be both time-reversed.
Pseudo-dissipation via ancillary modes via ancillary
modes can play an important role for the activation
functions implemented via nonlinearities. As we already
mentioned, the nonlinear evolution induced by the self-
interaction Hamiltonian can be understood as an activa-
tion function. It is desirable to chooseHNL in such a way
thattheinduced activationfunctionis notoscillatoryand
has a bounded derivative. Ideally, a monotonic function
would be the best option, reproducing standard ANN ac-
tivation functions. In most previous approaches to physi-
cal learning with nonlinear optical devices, the nonlinear-
ity is provided by a homogeneous Kerr self-interaction.
The eﬀect of a Kerr nonlinearity is to induce a phase
shift proportional to the intensity of the ﬁeld. Qualita-
tively, we can think of a Kerr medium as a deep neu-
ral network where the activation function is of the form
f(Ψ) = eig|Ψ|2
Ψ. This is an oscillatory function, which
is an undesirable property for an activation function in
an ANN. What is worse, the derivative of the Kerr phase
shift grows without bounds for increasing intensity. If we
want to mimick the behaviour of a sigmoid or ReLU ac-
tivation function, we must incorporate ancillary degrees
of freedom, because all such standard activation func-
tions are contractive. One possible choice is to use aχ(2)
nonlinearity, and to couple an ancillary mode to the eval-
uation ﬁeld:HSI =χ(2)(
Ψ∗
ancΨ2 + ΨancΨ∗2)
. When the
ancillary ﬁeld is initiallyΨanc = 0, the absolute value of
Ψ(t) as a function of the absolute value of the input is
qualitatively similar to a sigmoid function (although it is
not a monotonic function):
Ψ(t) = Ψ(0)sech
(
2−1/2χt|Ψ(0)|
)
. (32)
Aside from χ(2) nonlinearities, it is certainly also pos-
sible to produce an adequate activation function by a
judicious combination of ancillary modes and a Kerr
self-interaction Hamiltonian, or other kinds of self-
interaction. Sigmoid-like thresholders based on optical
Kerr eﬀect have been previously described[82], as well as
bistable optical switches [83]. It is known that the Kerr
interaction in combination with linear operations can be
used to construct the Fredkin gate, and therefore it is
universal for classical reversible computation [84].
Nevertheless, we should emphasize that non-oscillatory
activation functions are not a requirement for HEB, but
a way to improve the expressivity of the device for those
architectures that are more closely inspired on standard
artiﬁcial neural networks. Just like some nonlinearities
like ReLU work better in standard ANNs, in a SL device
some nonlinear interactions have better results for some
tasks. However, in general a SL device does not nec-
essarily require non-oscillatory activation function, and
in fact for many architectures of a SL device the con-
cept of activation function does not apply (for example,
consider a nonlinear core where the nonlinearity is homo-
geneously spread across all the device). Finding the best
architecture for each task will involve some future experi-
mentation, but in this section we oﬀered in advance some
insights about how to choose the best nonlinear systems.
Appendix G STABILIZATION OF THE
LEARNING FIELD
The primary method we envisage for HEB concerns
wave ﬁelds being transmitted through a nonlinear core,
and subsequent time-reversal operation and decay step
outside this core. In that case, as explained in the main
text, we are insensitive to the details of the Hamiltonian
of the nonlinear core.

===== PAGE 31 =====
31
However, one can also envisage situations where the
learning ﬁeld is not constantly being time-reversed (dur-
ing evaluation or training). When that is the case, one
needs to make sure the learning ﬁeld lives in a degenerate
manifold, such that it is only the learning dynamics that
will shift this learning ﬁeld.
Once training via HEB has been completed and the
cost function has been minimized, the learning parame-
ters should remain stable for long times. The problem
then is how to choose a physical system with degrees of
freedom that can remain stable in a continuum of states.
Mechanical degrees of freedom would be a priori a good
selection. The position of freely moving nanoparticles
or the orientation of a (possibly levitated) rotor (e.g. a
molecule or nanorod) are examples of systems that could
store a degree of freedom for indeﬁnitely long times. The
problem is that the time-reversal of mechanical systems
has no straightforward solution. The possible exception
to this statement are optomechanical systems, where the
couplingtothelightﬁeldcanbeemployedtotime-reverse
mechanical motion, but then the mechanical degree of
freedom oscillates around a single equilibrium position,
making it unsuitable for our purposes absent any addi-
tional ingredients. By contrast, in the case of wave ﬁelds,
the experimental techniques for phase conjugation are
better known, but storing information for longer times is
more problematic.
The solution is to engineer a suitable physical system
that has the desired characteristics. Modern systems in
integrated nonlinear optics and in superconducting mi-
crowave circuits allow for the design of a wide range of
nonlinear interactions between localized modes of the ra-
diation ﬁeld. In the following, we provide two examples
of how this ﬂexibility might be exploited to design a de-
generate ground state manifold for a learning ﬁeld.
In the ﬁrst example, we consider a cavity that has
two modes α1,α2 with the same frequency (like coun-
terpropagating modes in a microresonator). Inside the
cavity there is a nonlinear material that induces a re-
pulsive Kerr-type interaction. Both modes have the
same lifetime. In order to have stable states with non-
zero amplitude, we couple both modes to a parametric
drive. Let us deﬁne the quadratures of the ﬁeld modes as
q1,2 = Re{α1,2}/
√
2, p1,2 = Im{α1,2}/
√
2 and introduce
the abbreviationsQ2 :=q2
1 +q2
2,P 2 :=p2
1 +p2
2. In terms
of the quadratures, the full Hamiltonian reads
H =−χβQ2 +gQ4 +
(
χβ + 2gQ2)
P 2 +gP 4. (33)
This Hamiltonian is written in the frame rotating at the
mode frequency, and we assumed the parametric drive
amplitude β is purely real-valued. It is not hard to see
that this Hamiltonian is qualitatively similar to that of
a point particle moving inside a ’Mexican hat’ potential.
Using this analogy, it is clear that any state withP = 0
and Q2 =χβ/(2g) is a ground state. We could consider
the angle in the(q1,q 2)-plane as our learning parameter
θ. In order to couple to this parameter, the simplest
option we found is to suppose thatΨ interacts diﬀerently
with α1 and α2. For example, let us consider that there
is a nonlinear element that couplesΨ only toα1, through
a cross-phase modulation. The interaction Hamiltonian
then can be written in terms of the learning parameter
as Hint =g cos2θΨ∗Ψ.
Of course, storing a learning parameter in the ampli-
tudes of parametrically driven Kerr oscillators is not the
only possibility. As a further example, we brieﬂy present
anothersetupinwhich θ istherelativephasebetweentwo
modes. Consider two modes α1, α2 that are also para-
metrically driven. The two modesα1, α2 have diﬀerent
frequencies given by ω1, ω2, respectively. This physi-
cal system can be modelled by a Hamiltonian given by
χ(2) (βα∗
1α2 +β∗α1α∗
2) +∑2
j=1ωjα∗
jαj. It is clear that
this Hamiltonian is invariant with respect to any global
phase shiftαj→ eiϕαj, j = 1, 2. Let us introduce the
notation αj ≡| αj|eiϕj, where ϕ1,ϕ 2 are the phases of
α1, α2, respectively. We deﬁne the learning parameter
as θ :=ϕ1 +ϕ2. Because of the symmetry of the Hamil-
tonian, θ is a free parameter in the ground state. The
challenge is now to ﬁnd a way to coupleΨ to the learn-
ing parameters. One possible way is to consider that
Ψ has two components (ﬁeld modes)Ψ1, Ψ2. Choosing
adequately the frequency of the modesΨ1, Ψ2, the prod-
uct gα1α2Ψ∗
1Ψ2 +c.c. can be made resonant. Then, θ
parametrizes a linear interaction between the two com-
ponents ofΨ. This requires frequency stabilization of the
diﬀerence frequency ofΨ1 and Ψ2 vs. the sum frequency
of α1 and α2. The advantage, though, is that now the
symmetry of the Hamiltonian is more robust.
As we illustrated above, in order to engineer a physical
system that can store a continuous learning parameter,
we need to realize a Hamiltonian with some continuous
symmetry. The problem is that in any real implementa-
tion we may expect that any continuous symmetry will
be broken at some energy scale. If that is the case, most
conﬁgurations of the learning ﬁeld after training will have
a ﬁnite lifetime. Remember that we assume that, after
training, the learning ﬁeld ends in one of the degenerate
ground states ofH′
θ, which is an ideal, exactly degenerate
Hamiltonian. If the true Hamiltonian of the system is in-
stead given byH′
θ+δH′, the learning ﬁeld will slide down
in the energy landscape ofδH′. Eventually, it will end up
very far from the conﬁguration that had been obtained
as a result of training, unless the training is periodically
repeated to stabilize the "memory" of the system.
Thatpotentialproblemcouldbeavoidedifthelearning
parameters were stored in a discrete set of states. Con-
sider that nowH′
θ possesses a discrete set of degenerate
ground states. In such a case, a small perturbation inH′
θ
does not aﬀect the long term stability ofθ, as long as it
is much smaller than the energy barrier between the de-
generate states. Stochastic gradient descent (SGD) is a
strategy used to optimize continuous degrees of freedom.
Although HEB is originally motivated by the search of
a physical realization of SGD, we already argued that it
can still be useful for training discrete parameters. In
that case, HEB works in an analogous fashion to thermal

===== PAGE 32 =====
32
annealing. In this picture, one can think ofθ as a spin
system that can be approximately described by a thermal
distribution. The probability of each state is then given
by e−βHeﬀ[Θ], whereHeﬀ[Θ] is the eﬀective Hamiltonian
of Eq. (9). If the temperature is slowly reduced, the sys-
tem will undergo annealing, andΘ would end in one of
the local minima ofHeﬀ[Θ]. Spin-like degrees of freedom
can be realized, for example, with Optical Parametric
Oscillators [66].
[1] I. J. Goodfellow, Y. Bengio, and A. Courville, Deep
Learning (MIT Press, Cambridge, MA, USA, 2016)
http://www.deeplearningbook.org.
[2] C. D. Schuman, T. E. Potok, R. M. Patton, J. D. Bird-
well, M.E.Dean, G.S.Rose,andJ.S.Plank,ASurveyof
Neuromorphic Computing and Neural Networks in Hard-
ware, arXiv:1705.06963 [cs] (2017), arXiv: 1705.06963.
[3] D. Marković, A. Mizrahi, D. Querlioz, and J. Grollier,
Physics for neuromorphic computing, Nature Reviews
Physics 2, 499 (2020).
[4] B. J. Shastri, A. N. Tait, T. Ferreira de Lima, W. H. P.
Pernice, H. Bhaskaran, C. D. Wright, and P. R. Pruc-
nal,Photonicsforartiﬁcialintelligenceandneuromorphic
computing, Nature Photonics15, 102 (2021).
[5] L. G. Wright, T. Onodera, M. M. Stein, T. Wang, D. T.
Schachter, Z. Hu, and P. L. McMahon, Deep physical
neural networks trained with backpropagation, Nature
601, 549 (2022).
[6] B. Scellier and Y. Bengio, Equilibrium propagation:
Bridging the gap between energy-based models and back-
propagation, Frontiers in computational neuroscience11,
24 (2017).
[7] E. Martin, M. Ernoult, J. Laydevant, S. Li, D. Querlioz,
T. Petrisor, and J. Grollier, Eqspike: spike-driven equi-
librium propagation for neuromorphic implementations,
Iscience 24, 102222 (2021).
[8] K. Wagner and D. Psaltis, Multilayer optical learning
networks, Applied Optics26, 5061 (1987).
[9] H.-Y. S. Li, Y. Qiao, and D. Psaltis, Optical network
for real-time face recognition, Applied Optics32, 5026
(1993).
[10] K. Wagner and T. M. Slagle, Optical competitive learn-
ing with VLSI/liquid-crystal winner-take-all modulators,
Applied Optics32, 1408 (1993).
[11] S. R. Skinner, E. C. Behrman, A. A. Cruz-Cabrera, and
J. E. Steck, Neural network implementation using self-
lensing media, Applied Optics34, 4129 (1995).
[12] D. E. Rumelhart, G. E. Hinton, and R. J. Williams,
Learningrepresentationsbyback-propagatingerrors,Na-
ture 323, 533 (1986).
[13] D. Psaltis, D. Brady, and K. Wagner, Adaptive optical
networks using photorefractive crystals, Applied Optics
27, 1752 (1988).
[14] G. Wetzstein, A. Ozcan, S. Gigan, S. Fan, D. Englund,
M. Soljacic, C. Denz, D. A. B. Miller, and D. Psaltis,
Inference in artiﬁcial intelligence with deep optics and
photonics, Nature588, 39 (2020).
[15] J. Feldmann, N. Youngblood, C. D. Wright,
H. Bhaskaran, and W. H. P. Pernice, All-optical
spiking neurosynaptic networks with self-learning
capabilities, Nature569, 208 (2019).
[16] M. Stern, D. Hexner, J. W. Rocks, and A. J. Liu, Super-
vised learning in physical networks: From machine learn-
ing to learning machines, Physical Review X11, 021045
(2021).
[17] Y. Shen, N. C. Harris, S. Skirlo, M. Prabhu, T. Baehr-
Jones, M. Hochberg, X. Sun, S. Zhao, H. Larochelle,
D. Englund, and M. Soljacic, Deep Learning with Co-
herent Nanophotonic Circuits, Nature Photonics11, 441
(2017), arXiv: 1610.02365.
[18] X. Guo, T. D. Barrett, Z. M. Wang, and A. I. Lvovsky,
Backpropagation through nonlinear units for all-optical
training of neural networks, arXiv:1912.12256 [physics]
(2020), arXiv: 1912.12256.
[19] S. Hu, Y. Liu, Z. Liu, T. Chen, J. Wang, Q. Yu, L. Deng,
Y. Yin, and S. Hosaka, Associative memory realized by a
reconﬁgurable memristive Hopﬁeld neural network, Na-
ture Communications6, 10.1038/ncomms8522 (2015).
[20] D. Soudry, D. Di Castro, A. Gal, A. Kolodny, and
S. Kvatinsky, Memristor-based multilayer neural net-
works with online gradient descent training, IEEE trans-
actions on neural networks and learning systems26, 2408
(2015).
[21] Q. Xia and J. J. Yang, Memristive crossbar arrays
for brain-inspired computing, Nature materials18, 309
(2019).
[22] M. Schneider, E. Toomey, G. Rowlands, J. Shainline,
P. Tschirhart, and K. Segall, Supermind: a survey of
the potential of superconducting electronics for neuro-
morphic computing, Superconductor Science and Tech-
nology 35, 053001 (2022).
[23] A. Sengupta and K. Roy, Spin-Transfer Torque Mag-
netic neuron for low power neuromorphic computing, in
2015 International Joint Conference on Neural Networks
(IJCNN) (IEEE, Killarney, Ireland, 2015) pp. 1–7.
[24] J. Torrejon, M. Riou, F. A. Araujo, S. Tsunegi,
G. Khalsa, D. Querlioz, P. Bortolotti, V. Cros,
K. Yakushiji, A. Fukushima,et al., Neuromorphic com-
puting with nanoscale spintronic oscillators, Nature547,
428 (2017).
[25] J. Grollier, D. Querlioz, K. Camsari, K. Everschor-Sitte,
S. Fukami, and M. D. Stiles, Neuromorphic spintronics,
Nature electronics3, 360 (2020).
[26] A. F. Vincent, J. Larroque, N. Locatelli, N. B. Romd-
hane, O. Bichler, C. Gamrat, W. S. Zhao, J.-O. Klein,
S. Galdin-Retailleau, and D. Querlioz, Spin-transfer
torque magnetic memory as a stochastic memristive
synapse for neuromorphic systems, IEEE transactions on
biomedical circuits and systems9, 166 (2015).
[27] S. H. Jo, T. Chang, I. Ebong, B. B. Bhadviya,
P. Mazumder, and W. Lu, Nanoscale memristor device
as synapse in neuromorphic systems, Nano letters 10,
1297 (2010).
[28] J. M. Shainline, S. M. Buckley, R. P. Mirin, and S. W.
Nam, Superconducting optoelectronic circuits for neuro-
morphic computing, Physical Review Applied7, 034013
(2017).

===== PAGE 33 =====
33
[29] K. Friston, The free-energy principle: a uniﬁed brain the-
ory?, Nature Reviews Neuroscience11, 127 (2010).
[30] G. Bellec, F. Scherr, A. Subramoney, E. Hajek, D. Salaj,
R. Legenstein, and W. Maass, A solution to the learn-
ing dilemma for recurrent networks of spiking neurons,
Nature Communications11, 3625 (2020).
[31] J. Sacramento, R. Ponte Costa, Y. Bengio, and W. Senn,
Dendritic cortical microcircuits approximate the back-
propagation algorithm, Advances in neural information
processing systems31 (2018).
[32] T. P. Lillicrap, A. Santoro, L. Marris, C. J. Akerman,
and G. Hinton, Backpropagation and the brain, Nature
Reviews Neuroscience21, 335 (2020).
[33] G. E. Hinton and J. McClelland, Learning representa-
tions by recirculation, inNeural information processing
systems (1987).
[34] M. Hermans, M. Burm, T. V. Vaerenbergh, J. Dambre,
and P. Bienstman, Trainable hardware for dynamical
computing using error backpropagation through physical
media, Nature Communications6, 10.1038/ncomms7729
(2015).
[35] M. Hermans, M. Soriano, J. Dambre, P. Bienstman, and
I. Fischer, Photonic Delay Systems as Machine Learning
Implementations (2015), arXiv:1501.02592 [cs].
[36] T. W. Hughes, M. Minkov, Y. Shi, and S. Fan, Training
of photonic neural networks through in situ backpropa-
gation and gradient measurement, Optica5, 864 (2018).
[37] I. Stakgold and M. Holst, eds., Green’s Functions and
Boundary Value Problems: Stakgold/Green’s Functions
(John Wiley & Sons, Inc., Hoboken, NJ, USA, 2011).
[38] L. Hand and J. Finch,Analytical Mechanics(Cambridge
University Press, 1998) pp. 458–459.
[39] A. E. Motter, M. Gruiz, G. Károlyi, and T. Tél, Doubly
transient chaos: Generic form of chaos in autonomous
dissipative systems, Phys. Rev. Lett.111, 194101 (2013).
[40] A. N. Gomez, M. Ren, R. Urtasun, and R. B. Grosse,
The reversible residual network: Backpropagation with-
out storing activations (2017), arXiv:1707.04585 [cs.CV].
[41] B. Chang, L. Meng, E. Haber, L. Ruthotto, D. Begert,
and E. Holtham, Reversible architectures for arbitrarily
deep residual neural networks (2017), arXiv:1709.03698
[cs.CV].
[42] J. Behrmann, W. Grathwohl, R. T. Q. Chen, D. Duve-
naud, and J.-H. Jacobsen, Invertible residual networks
(2019), arXiv:1811.00995 [cs.LG].
[43] R. Boyd, Contemporary nonlinear optics (Academic
Press, 2012).
[44] G. He, Optical phase conjugation: principles, techniques,
and applications, Progress in Quantum Electronics26,
131 (2002).
[45] A. P. Brysev, L. Krutyanskii, and V. L. Preobrazhenskii,
Wave phase conjugation of ultrasonic beams, Physics-
Uspekhi 41, 793 (1998).
[46] L. Deng, E. W. Hagley, J. Wen, M. Trippenbach,
Y. Band, P. S. Julienne, J. Simsarian, K. Helmerson,
S. Rolston, and W. D. Phillips, Four-wave mixing with
matter waves, Nature398, 218 (1999).
[47] Y. Chang, H. R. Fetterman, I. L. Newberg, and S. K.
Panaretos, Microwave phase conjugation using antenna
arrays, IEEE Transactions on Microwave Theory and
Techniques46, 1910 (1998).
[48] A. Serga, B. Hillebrands, S. Demokritov, A. Slavin,
P. Wierzbicki, V. Vasyuchka, O. Dzyapko, and A. Chu-
mak, Parametric generation of forward and phase-
conjugated spin-wave bullets in magnetic ﬁlms, Physical
review letters94, 167202 (2005).
[49] D. A. B. Miller, Time reversal of optical pulses by four-
wave mixing, Optics Letters5, 300 (1980).
[50] J. Martin, B. Georgeot, and D. L. Shepelyansky, Time
Reversal of Bose-Einstein Condensates, Physical Review
Letters 101 (2008).
[51] Y. Zheng, H. Ren, W. Wan, and X. Chen, Time-reversed
wave mixing in nonlinear optics, Scientiﬁc Reports3,
3245 (2013).
[52] I. Sackey, F. Da Ros, M. Jazayerifar, T. Richter,
C. Meuer, M. Nölle, L. Molle, C. Peucheret, K. Peter-
mann, and C. Schubert, Kerr nonlinearity mitigation in
5 Å 28-GBd PDM 16-QAM signal transmission over a
dispersion-uncompensated link with backward-pumped
distributed Raman ampliﬁcation, Optics Express 22,
27381 (2014).
[53] M. Frazier, B. Taddese, T. Antonsen, and S. M. An-
lage, Nonlinear Time Reversal in a Wave Chaotic
System, Physical Review Letters 110, 10.1103/Phys-
RevLett.110.063902 (2013).
[54] A. Przadka, S. Feat, P. Petitjeans, V. Pagneux, A. Mau-
rel,andM.Fink,TimeReversalofWaterWaves,Physical
Review Letters 109, 10.1103/PhysRevLett.109.064501
(2012).
[55] I. N. Papadopoulos, S. Farahi, C. Moser, and D. Psaltis,
Focusing and scanning light through a multimode optical
ﬁber using digital phase conjugation, Optics express20,
10583 (2012).
[56] J. R. Ong, C. C. Ooi, T. Y. L. Ang, S. T. Lim, and
C. E. Png, Photonic Convolutional Neural Networks Us-
ing Integrated Diﬀractive Optics, IEEE Journal of Se-
lected Topics in Quantum Electronics26, 1 (2020).
[57] G. Marcucci, D. Pierangeli, and C. Conti, Theory of Neu-
romorphic Computing by Waves: Machine Learning by
Rogue Waves, Dispersive Shocks, and Solitons, Physical
Review Letters 125, 10.1103/PhysRevLett.125.093901
(2020).
[58] W. Yoshiki and T. Tanabe, All-optical switching using
kerr eﬀect in a silica toroid microcavity, Opt. Express
22, 24332 (2014).
[59] J. Sun, E. Timurdogan, A. Yaacobi, E. S. Hosseini, and
M.R.Watts,Large-scalenanophotonicphasedarray,Na-
ture 493, 195 (2013).
[60] M. C. Rechtsman, J. M. Zeuner, Y. Plotnik, Y. Lumer,
D. Podolsky, F. Dreisow, S. Nolte, M. Segev, and A. Sza-
meit, Photonic Floquet topological insulators, Nature
496, 196 (2013).
[61] N. Sarapat, T. Frank, and P. Yupapin, Conjugate mir-
ror design and simulation using a nonlinear coupling mi-
croring circuit, Journal of Nonlinear Optical Physics &
Materials 22, 1350024 (2013).
[62] A. C. Turner, M. A. Foster, A. L. Gaeta, and M. Lipson,
Ultra-low power parametric frequency conversion in a sil-
icon microring resonator, Optics express16, 4881 (2008).
[63] S. Ayotte, H. Rong, S. Xu, O. Cohen, and M. J. Panic-
cia, Multichannel dispersion compensation using a silicon
waveguide-based optical phase conjugator, Optics letters
32, 2393 (2007).
[64] M. W. Puckett, K. Liu, N. Chauhan, Q. Zhao, N. Jin,
H.Cheng, J. Wu, R. O.Behunin, P.T. Rakich, K. D.Nel-
son, et al., 422 million intrinsic quality factor planar inte-
grated all-waveguide resonator with sub-mhz linewidth,
Nature communications12, 1 (2021).

===== PAGE 34 =====
34
[65] D. Psaltis, D. Brady, X.-G. Gu, and S. Lin, Holography
in artiﬁcial neural networks, Nature343, 325 (1990).
[66] T. Inagaki, Y. Haribara, K. Igarashi, T. Sonobe, S. Ta-
mate, T. Honjo, A. Marandi, P. L. McMahon, T. Umeki,
K. Enbutsu, O. Tadanaga, H. Takenouchi, K. Aihara, K.-
i. Kawarabayashi, K. Inoue, S. Utsunomiya, and H. Take-
sue, A coherent Ising machine for 2000-node optimization
problems, Science354, 603 (2016).
[67] Y. Yamamoto, K. Aihara, T. Leleu, K.-i. Kawarabayashi,
S. Kako, M. Fejer, K. Inoue, and H. Takesue, Coher-
ent Ising machines - optical neural networks operat-
ing at the quantum limit, npj Quantum Information3,
10.1038/s41534-017-0048-9 (2017).
[68] D. Pierangeli, G. Marcucci, and C. Conti, Large-
Scale Photonic Ising Machine by Spatial Light Mod-
ulation, Physical Review Letters 122, 10.1103/Phys-
RevLett.122.213902 (2019).
[69] M. H. Devoret, Quantum ﬂuctuations in electrical cir-
cuits (1997).
[70] E. Toomey, K. Segall, M. Castellani, M. Colan-
gelo, N. Lynch, and K. K. Berggren, Superconducting
nanowire spiking element for neural networks, Nano Let-
ters 20, 8059 (2020).
[71] Q. Wang, A. Hamadeh, R. Verba, V. Lomakin,
M. Mohseni, B. Hillebrands, A. V. Chumak, and
P. Pirro, A nonlinear magnonic nano-ring resonator,
arXiv:2007.09205 [physics] (2020), arXiv: 2007.09205.
[72] https://github.com/victorlopezpastor/self_
learning_machines (2022).
[73] V. L. Pastor, J. Lundeen, and F. Marquardt, Arbitrary
optical wave evolution with fourier transforms and phase
masks, Optics Express29, 38441 (2021).
[74] M.Devoret, QuantumFluctuationsinElectricalCircuits,
inLesHouchesLectureNotesofthe1995schoolonQuan-
tum Fluctuations, eds. S. Reynaud, E. Giacobino, and J.
Zinn-Justin, Elsevier 1997.
[75] T. W. Hughes, I. A. D. Williamson, M. Minkov, and
S. Fan, Wave physics as an analog recurrent neural net-
work, Science Advances5, eaay6946 (2019).
[76] G. Angelatos, S. A. Khan, and H. E. Türeci, Reser-
voir computing approach to quantum state measurement,
Phys. Rev. X11, 041062 (2021).
[77] J. Hochstetter, R. Zhu, A. Loeﬄer, A. Diaz-Alvarez,
T. Nakayama, and Z. Kuncic, Avalanches and edge-
of-chaos learning in neuromorphic nanowire networks,
Nature Communications12, 10.1038/s41467-021-24260-z
(2021).
[78] C. Keup, T. Kühn, D. Dahmen, and M. Helias, Transient
chaotic dimensionality expansion by recurrent networks,
Phys. Rev. X11, 021064 (2021).
[79] B. Poole, S. Lahiri, M. Raghu, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and
S. Ganguli, Exponential expressivity in deep neural net-
works through transient chaos (2016).
[80] M. Farrell, S. Recanatesi, T. Moore, G. Lajoie, and
E. Shea-Brown, Gradient-based learning drives robust
representationsinrecurrentneuralnetworksbybalancing
compression and expansion, Nature Machine Intelligence
4, 564 (2022).
[81] M. Reck, A. Zeilinger, H. J. Bernstein, and P. Bertani,
Experimental realization of any discrete unitary opera-
tor, Physical Review Letters73, 58 (1994).
[82] N. J. Doran and D. Wood, Nonlinear-optical loop mirror,
Optics Letters13, 56 (1988).
[83] M. Soljacic, M. Ibanescu, S. G. Johnson, Y. Fink,
and J. D. Joannopoulos, Optimal bistable switching
in nonlinear photonic crystals, Physical Review E 66,
10.1103/PhysRevE.66.055601 (2002).
[84] M.-S. Kang, J. Heo, S.-G. Choi, S. Moon, and S.-W. Han,
Optical Fredkin gate assisted by quantum dot within op-
tical cavity under vacuum noise and sideband leakage,
Scientiﬁc Reports10, 5123 (2020).