arXiv:nlin/0110044v1  [nlin.AO]  23 Oct 2001
Plasticity and learning in a network of coupled phase oscill ators
Philip Seliger, Stephen C. Young, and Lev S. Tsimring
Institute for Nonlinear Science, University of California , San Diego, La Jolla, CA 92093-0402
(March 8, 2021)
A generalized Kuramoto model of coupled phase oscillators w ith slowly varying coupling matrix
is studied. The dynamics of the coupling coeﬃcients is drive n by the phase diﬀerence of pairs of
oscillators in such a way that the coupling strengthens for s ynchronized oscillators and weakens
for non-synchronized pairs. The system possesses a family o f stable solutions corresponding to
synchronized clusters of diﬀerent sizes. A particular clus ter can be formed by applying external
driving at a given frequency to a group of oscillators. Once e stablished, the synchronized state
is robust against noise and small variations in natural freq uencies. The phase diﬀerences between
oscillators within the synchronized cluster can be used for information storage and retrieval.
PACS: 05.45.Xt, 07.05.Mh, 87.18.Sn, 87.19.La
I. INTRODUCTION
The mechanisms of adaptation and learning in natural and artiﬁcial s ystems are the subject of paramount interest
in neuroscience. Most of the experimental evidence point to the sy naptic modiﬁcation as the physiological basis of
the long-term memory [1,2]. Hebb [3] was the ﬁrst who suggested tha t the synaptic coupling between two neurons is
enhanced if both neurons are simultaneously active. Recent exper imental data suggest that the synaptic connections
are strengthened (long-term potentiation) or weakened (long-t erm depression) depending on the precise relative timing
between pre-synaptic and post-synaptic spikes [2,4,5].
Many current theoretical studies of learning in neural systems ar e based on the quasi-static Hopﬁeld model [6]
utilizing McCulloch-Pitts neuronal units or simple “integrate-and-ﬁr e” models of neurons coupled via synapses which
accumulate the pre-synaptic activity (spikes from other neurons ) into a growing membrane potential of a neuron [7].
The latter generates its own spike (“ﬁres”) once the membrane po tential exceeds a certain threshold. The synaptic
strength is in fact not ﬁxed, but changes in response to external stimuli and/or inter-neural dynamics. Various models
based on this general picture [8,9], have been shown to yield diﬀerent ial Hebbian learning rules.
A complimentary approach to modeling the neuronal activity involves replacing neurons by periodic oscillators.
Indeed, rhythmic activity plays important role in many neuronal sys tems and functions, including central pattern
generators, visual and olfactory systems, etc. [10]. Neural net works can often be described as networks of coupled
oscillators, so the role of relative spike timing is played by the phases o f individual oscillators (see, for example,
[11–14]). Close to the Hopf bifurcation, the dynamics of the array o f coupled oscillators can be described by the
Landau-Stewart equations for complex amplitudes of the oscillator s. Furthermore, one can reduce the dynamics of
the oscillators to the pure phase dynamics by assuming that the cou pling is weak, and the amplitude of oscillations
is slaved to the phase variations. In fact, the phase dynamics desc ription may still be valid even away from the
Hopf bifurcation point, where the Landau-Stewart description is n ot applicable. This idea was ﬁrst put forth by
Winfree [15] and later developed by Kuramoto [16] and others [17]. Th e original Kuramoto model, in which the
coupling coeﬃcients were chosen ﬁxed and equal, allowed for the eleg ant analytical treatment within the mean ﬁeld
approximation. It was shown that the system of globally coupled osc illators with non-identical frequencies exhibits a
second-order phase transition as the coupling strength is increas ed above some critical value.
In subsequent work, more complex coupling functions were conside red [14,18,19]. It was shown that depending on
the choice of the connectivity matrix, synchronized states with no n-trivial phase relationship among the oscillators
can emerge. Networks of coupled phase oscillators with appropriat ely tuned coupling matrix were shown to have neu-
rocomputing properties similar to those of classical Hopﬁeld networ ks, with an important distinction that memorized
patterns are stored in the form of relative phases of synchronize d oscillators rather than in static equilibria.
In those studies, the connectivity matrix, however complicated, w as imposed externally to achieve the desired
network dynamics. In fact, in order to achieve certain behavior (f or example, to memorize an image), in a system
of N neurons, N 2 coupling coeﬃcients have to be speciﬁed. This would present signiﬁca nt diﬃculties in operating
such a system at large N . In biological neural networks this task is not assigned to any cent ral control unit, but is
performed in a distributed manner via the mechanism of synaptic plas ticity, i.e. long term potentiation or depression
of synapses in response to the dynamics of pre-synaptic and post -synaptic neurons [2,8]. External stimuli directly
aﬀect only the dynamics of individual neurons and not their connect ions, while the synaptic plasticity is a result
1
of the inter-neuronal interactions. This evolution of connectivity matrix have been introduced in Ref. [13] for the
Landau-Stewart model of coupled oscillators, however no analysis of the joint dynamics of the network of oscillators
and the connectivity matrix has been presented. In this paper, we stu dy the simplest possible model of this process,
based on the generalization of the Kuramoto model. In particular, w e assume that the coupling coeﬃcient for a link
between two oscillators is a slow function of the phase diﬀerence bet ween the two oscillators.
The paper is organized as follows. In Section II we introduce the gen eralized Kuramoto model with additional
equations describing the slow evolution of the coupling matrix. In Sec tion III, a simple case of two coupled oscillators
is investigated. We show that for large enough separation of time sc ales of fast and slow motions, the system is
bistable: depending on initial conditions, oscillators can be either syn chronized or non-synchronized. In Sections
IV,V, we study the existence and stability of the family of synchroniz ed cluster solutions in the continuum limit
N → ∞. In Section VI, we show that the generalized Kuramoto system can serve as a very simple model of learning
and memory. Information is stored within the synchronized cluster in the form of phase diﬀerences between oscillators.
Section VII summarizes our conclusions.
II. MODEL
Let us consider the dynamics of an ensemble of N coupled phase oscillators
˙φi =ωi − 1
N
N∑
j=1
KijF (φi −φj ). (1)
Here ωi are natural frequencies and φi are phases of individual oscillators, F (φ) is a 2 π-periodic coupling function,
and Kij is the N ×N matrix of coupling coeﬃcients.
In order to include the mechanism of adaptation into model (1), we a ssume that an element of the coupling matrix
describing interaction between two oscillators, i and j, is controlled by the following equation,
˙Kij =ǫ(G(φi −φj) −Kij), (2)
whereG(φ) is a 2π-periodic function of its argument. The particular form of the coup ling functionF (φ) and adaptation
function G(φ) can be derived from the underlying equations describing the dynam ics of oscillators through the
reduction to the phase description. Following Kuramoto [16], we choo se the simplest possible periodic function
F (φ) = sin φ. Furthermore, we choose the adaptation function G(φ) = α cosφ. This choice implies that the coupling
coeﬃcient grows fastest for two oscillators which are in-phase and decays fastest for out-of-phase oscillators. There
are certain indication in the biological literature (see Ref. [2]) that th e maximal LTP and LTD correspond to small
positive and negative phase shifts between pre-synaptic and post -synaptic neuronal oscillations, but we are going to
ignore this complication in this model for the sake of simplicity. With the chosen functions, our model becomes
˙φi =ωi − 1
N
N∑
j=1
Kij sin(φi −φj), (3)
˙Kij =ǫ(α cos(φi −φj) −Kij). (4)
For small ǫ, the dynamics of the coupling coeﬃcients is slow, and one can expect that for two oscillators which are
non-synchronized, the driving term α cos(φi −φj ) is oscillating around zero, and the resultant coupling coeﬃcient
is also oscillating around zero and is small O(ǫ). On the other hand, a pair of synchronized oscillators produces a
constant non-zero driving for the corresponding coupling coeﬃcie nt, and therefore for large enough α, the connection
between the two will be strengthened. Thus, we anticipate a multi-s table behavior, when a group of oscillators can
either be stably synchronized or non-synchronized depending on t he initial conditions for their coupling coeﬃcient.
To illustrate this point, we ﬁrst consider a simple case of two oscillator s symmetrically coupled through a single link.
III. TWO COUPLED OSCILLATORS
In this case model (3),(4) reduces to a set of two coupled equation s,
˙φ = ∆ω −K sinφ,
˙K =ǫ(α cosφ −K). (5)
2
Here φ = φ1 −φ2, K = K12 = K21, and ∆ ω = ω1 −ω2. By introducing new variables ˜t = ∆ωt, ˜K = K/∆ω, ˜α =
α/∆ω, ˜ǫ =ǫ/∆ω, system (5) is simpliﬁed to
˙φ = 1 − ˜K sinφ,
˙˜K = ˜ǫ(˜α cosφ − ˜K). (6)
The nullclines of this system ˜K = ˜α cosφ and ˜K = 1/ sinφ intersect at large enough ˜α > ˜αc = 2. In this case,
within each period of the relative phase φ, there are four intersections corresponding to two stable and tw o unstable
ﬁxed points (see Figures 2,b,c. For small ˜ ǫ, the dynamics of the system can be separated into fast and slow mo tions.
If initial value ˜K0 > 1, the phase variable φ rapidly approaches the quasi-static value arcsin ˜K − 1
0 corresponding to
the nullcline, without any signiﬁcant change of K. Then, depending on whether ˜K0 is greater or smaller than the
value ˜Ku corresponding to the unstable ﬁxed point, the solution either slowly approaches the stable ﬁxed point ˜Ks
(synchronized regime), or it reaches the minimum of the nullcline and t hen branches oﬀ to inﬁnity along the fast
trajectory. The same occurs if ˜K0 < 1. This corresponds to the regime of non-synchronized oscillations . For larger
values of ˜ǫ, the dynamics can no longer be reduced to fast and slow motions. Mo reover, for any ﬁxed ˜ α > ˜αc,
there exists some critical value of ˜ ǫc such that at ˜ǫ > ˜ǫc there are no unbounded solutions corresponding to the
non-synchronized motion. On the other hand, if ˜ α< ˜αc, there are no ﬁxed points corresponding to the synchronized
solutions, and the oscillators are desynchronized for any values of ǫ. Figure 2b,c shows the structure of the phase
plane for system (6) for ˜ ǫ >˜ǫc and ˜ǫ <˜ǫc, respectively. Figure 1 shows the dependence of ˜ ǫc vs. ˜α. As expected,
˜ǫc diverges as ˜α → ˜αc+. This line together with vertical line ˜ α = ˜αc divides the parameter plane into three regions.
For ˜α < ˜αc, there can only be non-synchronized solutions (Fig.2,a), for ˜ α > ˜αc, ˜ǫ >˜ǫc there are only synchronized
solutions (Fig.2,b), and for ˜ α > ˜αc, ˜ǫ < ˜ǫc, there is a bistable state when both desynchronized and synchron ized
regimes are stable (Fig.2,c).
The results of this section can be applied to a more generic case of ma ny coupled oscillators. Indeed, as ǫ and/or
α is increased, the spontaneous clustering usually begins from synch ronization of pairs of neighboring oscillators. For
this process, the coupling between these oscillators and other osc illators can be neglected. Symbols in Fig. 1 show
the results of numerical experiments with a population of 50 oscillato rs uniformly distributed within a range ∆Ω = 1
starting from small randomized initial coupling Kij. The bifurcation to random parings of oscillators which precedes
the cluster formation, occurs close to the theoretical line predict ed for a simple case of two coupled oscillators.
0 2.5 5 7.5 10 12.5 15
0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
 
α~
εc~
unstable
stable
bistable
αc
~
FIG. 1. Phase diagram ˜ ǫc( ˜α for the model of two coupled oscillators (6). Symbols show th e results of numerical simulations
with 50 uniformly distributed oscillators. Circles corres pond to the non-synchronized regime, and stars indicate an o nset of
synchronization of pairs of oscillators, which usually pre cedes spontaneous cluster formation.
3
0 p 2 p 3 p 4 p
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3K
0                 π                  2π               3π                4πα
~
a
0 p 2 p 3 p 4 p
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3
0                 π                  2π                3π               4π
K
φ
~
b
0 p 2 p 3 p 4 p
-3
-2
-1
0
1
2
3K
0                 π                  2π                3π               4π
φ
~
c
FIG. 2. Phase plane of Eqs.(6): a - for ˜α < ˜αc there are no ﬁxed points corresponding to synchronized regi me; b - for ˜α = 2.7
and ˜ǫ = .33 all initial conditions lead to stable ﬁxed points; c - for ˜α = 2 .7 and ˜ǫ = .1 unbounded solutions coexist with ﬁxed
points.
4
IV. MANY COUPLED OSCILLATORS - STATIONAR Y STATES
In this section we return to the dynamics of the original model (3),( 4). As was pointed out in Section II, for small
ǫ, in the asymptotic regime the coupling coeﬃcients are either non-st ationary but small (for two oscillators operating
at diﬀerent frequencies) or ﬁxed for two oscillators which are sync hronized. So, in the limit ǫ → 0, we can neglect all
Kij for non-synchronized oscillators, and deﬁne Kij = α cos(φi −φj) for synchronized oscillators. Substituting this
into Eq.(3), we obtain for oscillators within a cluster,
˙φi =ωi − α
2N
Nc∑
j=1
sin[2(φi −φj)]. (7)
where unlike Ref. [16] summation only applies to oscillators within the sa me cluster, and ˙φi =ωi for oscillators outside
synchronized cluster. It is easy to see that Eq.(7) is formally equiva lent to the Kuramoto model for the double phases
2φi.
One can investigate this model in the mean-ﬁeld limit N → ∞ using the order parameter method [16]. In this case,
the complex order parameter reads
τe 2iθ = lim
N →∞
N − 1
Nc∑
i=1
e2iψi =
∫ π
− π
n(ψ)e2iψdψ. (8)
where ψ =φ − Ωt, Ω is the frequency of the synchronized cluster, n(ψ) is the phase distribution of the oscillators in
the population which belong to the cluster. The phases of the oscillat ors inside the cluster are given by
ψi =θ + 1
2 arcsin
( 2(ωi − Ω)
ατ
)
, (9)
and the phase distribution n(ψ) can be easily expressed via the frequency distribution of the sync hronized oscillators
g(ω),
n(ψ) =
{
ατg
( ατ
2 sin 2(ψ −θ) + Ω
)
cos(2(ψ −θ)) for B <2(ψ −θ)<A
0, outside (10)
where A,B determine size and position of the synchronized cluster, ( −π/2<B < A < π/2). Substituting (10) into
Eq.(8), we obtain the equation for the magnitude of the order para meterτ
α
2
∫ A
B
g
(ατ
2 sinx + Ω
)
cosx eixdx = 1. (11)
The frequency spread inside the synchronized cluster is determine d by formula
∆Ωc = ατ
2 (sinA − sinB), (12)
which follows directly from Eqs.(9). Thus, this system exhibit degene racy so that a variety of synchronized states
can be formed depending on initial conditions. It is particularly eviden t for the uniform distribution of oscillator
frequencies within frequency interval ∆Ω, g(ω) = ∆Ω − 1. In this case, the cluster size drops out, the limits of
integration are symmetric, B = −A, and we arrive at
α
2∆Ω
∫ A
− A
cosx eixdx = 1, (13)
which reduces to an algebraic equation for phase width of the cluste r A,
A + 1
2 sin(2A) = 2∆Ω
α . (14)
The phase width of the cluster A depends only on α/∆Ω and does not depend on the cluster size τ . This dependence
is shown in Fig.3. For large α, A ≈ ∆Ω/α. At α → α0 = 4π− 1∆Ω, A → π/2. The frequency spread inside the
synchronized cluster is equal to ∆Ω c = ατ sinA (cf. (12)). At α < α0, there can be no stationary synchronized
5
clusters. These ﬁndings are conﬁrmed by direct numerical simulatio ns of Eqs.(3),(4). In Fig.3 the phase width of the
cluster is shown for several values of α/∆Ω, and in Fig.4 the evolution of an unstable cluster at α = 1.25 < α0 is
shown. The parameters of simulations were N = 50, ∆Ω = 1 , ǫ = 0.002, and the initial cluster width was chosen
∆Ωc = 0.5.
0.5 1 1.5 2 2.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5A
  α/∆Ω
π/2
FIG. 3. Phase spread of the cluster A as a function of α/∆Ω from Eq.(14). Dots indicate the results of numerical simu lations
of Eqs.(3),(4) with 50 uniformly distributed oscillators w ith ∆Ω = 1 , ǫ = 0.002.
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
10
20
30
40
50
60
70
80
90
Oscillator index
90
80
70
60
10
20
30
40
50t
5       10       15      20      25      30      35     40     45     50
FIG. 4. Gray-scale plot of the evolution of instantaneous os cillator frequencies ˙φi for an unstable cluster at α = 1 .25
Parameters of the simulation are N = 50, ǫ = 0.002, ∆Ω = 1.
V. STABILITY OF THE CLUSTERED STATE
As we have seen in the previous Section, the order parameter τ which characterizes the cluster size, can take any
value from 0 to τmax (for the uniform frequency distribution the latter corresponds t o the whole population being
synchronized,τmax = ∆Ω/α sinA). However, this is true only for small enough ǫ. Just as in the case of two coupled
oscillators (Sec.III), at suﬃciently large ǫ > ǫc, the multistability disappears, and the only stable state at α > αc is
the one involving the whole population of oscillators, ∆Ω c = ∆Ω. In order to determine ǫc, we analyze the following
6
problem. Suppose we have a synchronized cluster oscillating at freq uency Ω and characterized by the order parameter
τ . Let us consider a single oscillator with frequency ω0 adjacent to the cluster ( ω0 = Ω + ∆Ω c/2), and study its
dynamics neglecting its interaction with all other oscillators and the t he feedback inﬂuence of the oscillator on the
cluster. Clearly, since the frequency diﬀerence between this oscilla tor and the cluster is smaller than that for any
other non-synchronized oscillator, the adjacent oscillator will be t he ﬁrst to get entrained at ǫc. The equation for the
relative phase ψ0 =φ0 − Ωt of this oscillator reads
˙ψ0 = ∆Ωc
2 + 1
N
Nc∑
i=1
Ki sin(ψi −ψ0), (15)
and the equation for the coupling coeﬃcient between the oscillator a nd the i-th member of the cluster,
˙Ki =ǫ(α cos(ψi −ψ0) −Ki). (16)
The summation in Eq.(15) is carried only over synchronized oscillators . The phases ψi of the synchronized oscillators
are determined by Eq.(9).
In the continuum limit for the uniform frequency distribution, these equations become
˙ψ0 = ∆Ωc
2 + ατ
∆Ω
∫ A/2
− A/2
K(ψ) cos(2ψ) sin(ψ −ψ0)dψ, (17)
˙K(ψ) = ǫ(α cos(ψ −ψ0) −K(ψ)). (18)
Eq.(17) can be rewritten in the form
˙ψ0 = ∆Ωc
2 + ατ
∆Ω (P cosψ0 −Q sinψ0), (19)
where
P =
∫ A/2
− A/2
K(ψ) sinψ cos 2ψdψ, (20)
Q =
∫ A/2
− A/2
K(ψ) cosψ cos 2ψdψ. (21)
Equations for P,Q can be obtained using Eq.(18),
˙P =ǫ (αF− sinψ0 −P ), (22)
˙Q =ǫ (αF+ cosψ0 −Q), (23)
whereF± = 1
2 sinA ± ( 1
4A + 1
8 sin 2A). The set of equations (19),(22),(23) exhibits the dynamics similar t o Eqs.(6) for
two coupled oscillators. At α <α0 = 4π− 1∆Ω, the only attractor of the system is the solution with periodic P and
Q and unbounded phase φ which corresponds to “non-entrainment” of the oscillator by the c luster. For the phase
variable taken modulo 2π, this solution corresponds to a limit cycle encircling the phase cylinder . At larger α >α0,
two ﬁxed points appear, one of which (stable) corresponds to the entrainment of the oscillator by the cluster. At
ǫ>ǫ 0(α), the limit cycle disappears, and the entrained state is the only stab le state of the system. Thus, the critical
line ǫ0(α) separates the region of cluster stability with respect to entrainin g additional oscillators. This line is shown
in Figure 5. This line should be compared with the critical line for pairing o f two neighboring oscillators (Fig.1).
Note that we have to re-scale ˜ ǫ and ˜α back into original ǫ and α using ˜ǫ = ǫN , ˜α = 2α/∆Ω. For large N , this line
lies below ǫ0(α), which indicates that the random pairing outside the cluster occur s before the main cluster loses its
stability. This conclusion agrees with our numerical simulations.
7
0 2 4 6 8
α
0
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.1
ε
ε0
εc
α 0 α c
FIG. 5. Parameter plane ( α, ǫ). A cluster is stable at α > α 0 and ǫ < ǫ 0. For α < α 0, clusters do not exist, for α < α 0
and ǫ > ǫ 0, cluster size increases spontaneously. Dashed line shows t he stability limit for synchronization of two neighboring
oscillators, for α > α c and ǫ > ǫ c, random pairing of oscillators outside the main cluster occ urs.
VI. LEARNING AND MEMOR Y
Information can be stored within the cluster in the form of relative p hases of the oscillators in the synchronized state.
Initial learning can be accomplished via driving a group of oscillators by external signals with identical frequency ω0
and magnitude K0, but with diﬀerent phases φ0
i ,
˙φi =ωi − 1
N
N∑
j=1
Kij sin(φi −φj) +K0 sin(φi −ω0t −φ0
i ), (24)
˙Kij =ǫ(α cos(φi −φj ) −Kij). (25)
IfK0 ≫ 1, every oscillator in the group will be entrained to the external fre quencyω0. So, the external driving signals
force the oscillators to oscillate in synchrony and, via slow synaptic d ynamics Eq.(25), form a tightly coupled cluster.
If the phases φ0
i are taken to be 0 or π, the relative phases φi −φj within the cluster will be also close to 0 or π, and
so the coupling coeﬃcients Kij will approach ±α. After the learning is completed after t ≈O(ǫ− 1) time, the external
signal is disconnected ( K0 → 0). If the external frequency ω0 = Ω, the mean frequency of oscillators within the
cluster, the cluster remains synchronized at the same frequency , moreover, the phase relations among the oscillators
are eﬀectively preserved. Even signiﬁcant random ﬂuctuations aﬀ ecting the dynamics of individual oscillators, do not
change the robust structure of the synchronized cluster, see F ig.6.
For smallǫ, after a cluster is formed, it becomes very stable with respect to e xternal noise. Furthermore, it remains
stable with respect to random variations of their natural frequen cies. We let the cluster form similarly to described
above, and then at some time t1, we perturbed the natural frequencies of all oscillators, ¯ ωi = ωi + ∆ωξi, where ξi
are i.i.d. Gaussian random variable with variance 1. We can quantify the robustness of the cluster by measuring the
correlation between the synchronized cluster structure before and after the random ﬂuctuations of natural frequencies
have been applied. The correlation was calculated using the formula
C =
∑N
i=1pi ∧qi
∑N
i=1pi ∨qi
, (26)
wherepi(qi) is the binary variable describing the state of the oscillator before( after) perturbing the natural frequencies:
pi(qi) = 1 if the oscillator is entrained in the main cluster and pi(qi) = 0 otherwise. Symbols ∨ and ∧ denote Boolean
addition and multiplication, respectively. It is easy to see that C = 1 when cluster remains unchanged, and C = 0 if
all oscillators leave the cluster.
8
5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50
20
40
60
80
100
120
140
1
time
120
140
100
80
40
5     10      15       20      25     30     35      40     45     50
Oscillator index
t
t 0
FIG. 6. Relative phase distribution of oscillators within t he cluster with respect to the “middle” oscillator i = 25. The
cluster is initialized by external forcing of oscillators 1 5-37 at frequency ω0 = Ω = 10 .0 for 0 < t < t 0 = 20. At t > t 0, the
external forcing was turned oﬀ, but the phase distribution w ithin the cluster survived. At t > t 1 = 75, oscillators were driven
by random external ﬂuctuation of magnitude 0.01. Despite of this forcing, the phase pattern “memorized” by the cluster, was
preserved.
Figure 7 shows correlation C as a function of the perturbation magnitude ∆ ω for several values of α. As can be
seen in the Figure, the cluster becomes more robust with increase o fα.
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
pertubation magnitude
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Correlation  
   Alpha = 1.3
   Alpha = 1.7
   Alpha = 2.5
FIG. 7. Stability of cluster measured with the correlation o f the cluster before and after perturbation of natural frequ encies.
The diﬀerent curves are for several values of α, ǫ increases the stability of the cluster only slightly and fal ls of parallel to the
curves for similar α.
VII. CONCLUSION
In summary, we have demonstrated that a generalized Kuramoto m odel with additional equations describing slow
dynamics of the coupling matrix can be used to elucidate the underlyin g mechanism of synaptic plasticity. The slow
dynamics leads to the multi-stability: synchronized clusters of diﬀer ent sizes and with diﬀerent phase relationships
among oscillators can be stabilized. The phase diﬀerences among the oscillators can be used as a way of storing and
9
retrieving the information in this system. One natural limitation of th e reduced phase description of the oscillators is
that all oscillators are assumed to be in the excited (“ﬁring”) state . However, in natural systems (such as biological
neural networks), some of the neurons may be in quiescent (“non -ﬁring”) regime. A more general description of this
system should incorporate equations for complex amplitudes of osc illators similar to Ref. [12].
Our results may have important biological implications. In particular, they suggest that there are fundamental
reasons for the wide separation of time scales of fast neuronal dy namics ( e.g. membrane potential oscillations) and
slow synaptic variability. They also present a very simple (possibly, th e simplest) model of the synaptic reentry
reinforcement which is believed to be the foundation of the long-term memory stabilit y [1].
We are indebted to M.I.Rabinovich and R. Huerta for fruitful discuss ions. This work was supported by the U.S.
Department of Energy grant DE-FG03-96ER14592 and by UC-MEX US/CONACYT.
[1] E. Shimizu, Y.-P. Tang, C. Rampon, and J. Z. Tsien, Scienc e, 290, 1170-1174 (2000).
[2] L.F.Abbott and S.B.Nelson, Nature Neuroscience Suppl. , 3m 1178 (2000).
[3] D.O. Hebb, The organization of behavior, Wiley, New York , 1949.
[4] H. Markram, J. L¨ ubke, M. Frotscher, B. Sakmann, Science , 275, 213-215 (1997).
[5] L.I.Zhang, H.W.Tao, C.E.Holt, W.A.Harris, M.Poo, Natu re, 395, 37 (1998).
[6] J.J.Hopﬁeld, Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci., 79, 2554 (1982).
[7] H. Tuckwell, Introduction to Theoretical Neurobiology. Cambridge, 1988.
[8] P.D. Roberts, Phys. Rev. E, 62, 4077 (2000).
[9] H.D.I.Abarbanel, R. Huerta, M.I.Rabinovich, in prepar ation.
[10] C.M.Gray, J.Comput. Neurosci., 1, 11 (1994).
[11] H.Sompolinsky, D.Golomb, and D.Kleinfeld, Phys. rev. A, 43, 6990 (1991).
[12] T.Aoyagi, Phys. Rev. Lett., 74, 4075 (1995).
[13] F.C. Hoppensteadt and E.M.Izhikevich, Biol. Cybern., 75, 129 (1996).
[14] F.C. Hoppensteadt and E.M.Izhikevich, IEEE Trans. Neu ral Networks, 11, 734 (2000).
[15] A.T.Winfree, J. Theor. Biol. 16, 15 (1967).
[16] Y.Kuramoto, Chemical Oscillations, Waves, and Turbulence (Springer, New York, 1984).
[17] See review by S.H.Strogatz, Physica D 143, 1 (2000).
[18] M.K.Yueng and S.H. Strogatz, Phys. Rev. Lett., 82, 648. (1999)
[19] F.C. Hoppensteadt and E.M.Izhikevich, Phys. Rev. Lett ., 82, 2983 (1999).
10